Floristic and Functional comparison of karst pastures and karst meadows from the North Adriatic Karst
In the present study , we compared the species richness and the floristic and functional composition of two types of extensively managed , species rich dry grasslands (class Festuco-Brometea) from the North Adriatic Karst: karst pastures (alliance Satureion subspicatae) and karst meadows (alliance Scorzonerion villose) . 
Karst pastures are characterized by shallow rocky soils , high pH , and dry , warm conditions , whereas karst meadows have developed on deeper soil , with more humus and moisture and neutral to alkaline pH . 
The data set included a table with 100 phytosociological relevés of the studied grasslands and a matrix with 15 functional traits determined for 180 plant species . 
We found high species richness in these grasslands but no statistically significant differences in species richness between karst pastures and meadows . 
Differences in floristic composition were analysed with Detrended Correspondence Analysis , which supported a clear division between the two vegetation types and indicated that species composition could best be explained in terms of soil humidity and nutrient availability . 
We also detected several differences in plant functional traits between meadows and pastures . 
Some of the traits indicate greater resource availability on karst meadows (in particular , high SLA , low LDMC) . 
In contrast , karst pastures have more slow-growing species with a combination of traits that can be interpreted as an avoidance strategy in relation to disturbance (e . g . , grazing) in low productive habitats (e . g . , low SLA , high LDMC , early flowering species and plants with rosette) . 
A lower relative proportion of competitors (C) and ruderals (R) , and a higher relative proportion of stress-tolerators (S) in karst pastures also suggested that these grasslands generally experience higher intensities of stress when compared to karst meadows , presumably owing to lower resource availability on stony , shallow soil . 
We could conclude that karst meadows and pastures differ significantly in both floristic composition and functional trait means , owing to their distinctive land-use (disturbance) and environmental conditions . 
Keywords: dry grasslands , plant functional traits , Festuco-Brometea , Sw Slovenia , DCA , CSR plant strategies . 
