Exploring Relationships Between Karst Terrains and Social Features by the Example of Gömör-Torna Karst (Hungary-Slovakia)
Human-environment relations have some special characteristics on karst terrains , and karstlands are usually less densely inhabited areas principally due to hydrologic , topographic and pedologic reasons . 
However , the natural factors of karst terrains and socio-economic development are rarely discussed together , and the relationships are usually expressed in qualitative terms . 
Therefore the aim of this paper is to explore the direct and indirect quantitative impact of natural settings on socio-economic development of karst terrains using GIS-aided , statistical methods as a modern approach within geographic possibilism by the case study of Gömör-Torna Karst (whose Hungarian part is known as Aggtelek Karst , while the Slovakian part as Slovak Karst) . 
Relationships between natural factors (elevation , slope , relative height , distance from significant rivers) and land cover as well as between natural factors and social data (population density , settlement density , mean settlement population , population change , road network density) have been studied by regression analysis in order to determine how strongly these social parameters are influenced by the above natural factors . 
In certain cases (land cover categories , road network) slope is the best estimator , while in other cases (population density , long-term population change) , the distance from significant river provides the best correlation . 
Many karstlands are depopulating and ageing areas worldwide . 
So is the case for the Gömör-Torna Karst as well , but there are several interesting questions in connection with it . 
First , whether it is a recent process or a long-term situation . 
Second , whether the karst is different from the neighbouring non-karst areas from the viewpoint of demography . 
Third , whether the karst area is homogeneous from social point of view . 
Cluster analysis based on demographic changes since 1828 helped to explore inner variations of population scenarios . 
Certain social characteristics (e . g . unemployment) show a relatively (but only relatively) favorable present position of Aggtelek karst , while the Slovak Karst is economically more disadvantageous . 
Karst-related tourism is measurable but it has a decreasing trend and it is rather localized around Aggtelek . 
Human attitude is also an important factor that is also briefly discussed based on semi-structured interviews with local people . 
Keywords: human-environment relations , GIS , possibilism , Aggtelek Karst , Slovak Karst , tourism
