Karst in Ras Al-Khaimah , Northern United Arab Emirates
This paper presents karstological prospecting of selected areas in Ras Al-Khaimah Emirate , UAE . 
Several locations in Musandam Mountains have been explored for caves , karst springs and surface karst features . 
Two karst springs , Khatt and MeBreda , were analyzed for basic physical , chemical and microbiological parameters . 
Although they are both recharged from karst aquifers , they differ significantly . 
The first one is a thermal spring in which infiltrated rain water is mixed with more saline and mineralized water from greater depths . 
The location of the second one at the high altitude of 710 m a . s . l . is conditioned by the existence of a less permeable zone within a carbonate aquifer with a larger share of dolomite . 
There were increased concentrations of nitrates probably due to grazing goats around the spring but on the other hand there was surprisingly low number of total bacterial counts; however detected Escherichia coli indicated probable fecal contamination . 
None of the water from any of the tested sites matched the ISO criteria for direct human consumption . 
Surface rock relief resulted from different karst processes was studied in river beds and side walls of wadis and on the mountain plateaus . 
The slopes of the wadis are often dissected by large recesses , relatively rare subsoil forms , and karren with microrills and rain flutes . 
More extensive karren are found on the tops of the mountains . 
The rocky riverbeds of wadis were shaped by rapid water currents and corrosion at the contact with sediment . 
In the study area at the northern slopes of mountains no big cave was found . 
The largest discovered cave was in fact tectonic fracture which was extended due to the gravitational sliding of part of a mountain along a fissure . 
But several small (10−20 m long) solutional caves have been discovered and surveyed on the wadis slopes . 
They exhibit relatively simple assemblage of dominantly dead-end passages . 
Caves are vertically distributed at several levels above the wadis . 
The rocky relief of the caves indicates the paragenetic development of the caves . 
Some of the studies caves were fully and some partially filled with yellow clastic sediments . 
Also few layers of flowstone , calcite crystals and gypsum crystals were found . 
Mineralogical analyses show very similar composition of sediments: different minerals such as quartz , gypsum , kaolinite , smectite , illite , calcite and palygorskite in various proportions . 
Calcite and gypsum represent precipitates from the cave (crusts , crystals , cements) and the other minerals were brought to the cave most probably by water or wind from eroded rocks and / or soils from wadis catchment areas . 
Key words: karst in arid climate , wadi , karst springs , caves , rock features , United Arab Emirates . 
