Hypogenic caves in western Umbria (central Italy)
Three karst areas located in the western sector of the Umbria Region (Central Italy) are here described: one north of Perugia , and the others to the south , close to Todi . 
All the end members of karst processes , from solution caves to quaternary travertine deposits , are present in this region , associated with CO2 and H2S emissions . 
The geological and hydrogeological aspects of the main karst systems are analyzed and their underground morphologies and patterns taken into account . 
Caves have different sizes and vary from a single conduit to complex systems , where the passages show features related to a possible hypogenic speleogenesis . 
In the area north of Perugia there are small horizontal and vertical solution caves developed in poorly karstified marly limestone , along fracture systems , where phreatic morphologies are prevalent . 
The endogenic CO2 emissions seem to drive the underground karst evolution . 
Pozzi della Piana , located west of the town of Todi , is a fossil branchform network cave system developed in a quaternary travertine and extending for more than 2500 m . 
The cave passages are arranged on at least two levels , with phreatic morphologies , cupola ceilings , and blind pits . 
Microcrystalline spalled gypsum blocks are associated with cusp features and wall pockets . 
The cave-forming process is believed to be linked to travertine deposition by supersaturated carbonate hydrothermal water rich in H2S . 
In the Parrano area , the underground karst system consists of solution caves extending for many hundreds of meters at different elevations in both sides of a small gorge . 
The cave patterns vary from single conduits to ramiform passages with anastomotic galleries and pits that intercept the water table with a temperature of 26°C , pCO2 of 10-1 atm , and H2S concentrations of 10 mg / l . 
Spongework , corrosion pockets , and cupola ceilings are common morphologies , with gypsum replacing limestone wall deposits . 
Cave formation by hypogenic speleogenesis is also well known in the Apennine karst system of M . Cucco and Frasassi , where both fossil and active processes are observable . 
The same processes are responsible for the genesis of these karst systems in different geological and hydrogeological contexts . 
Keywords: speleogenesis , hypogenic caves , H2S , CO2 , Italy . 
