Thermomineral waters of inner Dinarides Karst
The Dinarides are the largest continuous karst region in Europe . 
With regard to a geotectonic view , they are divided into the Outer , Central and Inner Dinarides occupying the territories of Slovenia , Croatia , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Serbia and Montenegro . 
Numerous occurrences of thermomineral water have been recorded in the Inner Dinarides area . 
The majority of them are genetically related to carbonate sediments of Mesozoic age . 
This paper deals with occurrences of thermomineral waters of the Inner Dinarides karst , their quantitative and qualitative characteristics , basic genetic types , the age of karst thermomineral waters of the Inner Dinarides , the available quantities of hydrogeothermalmineral energy , balneological potential and the possibility of rational multi-purpose utilisation . 
Hydrochemical and isotope methods have been used for the analysis of basic genetic types and age of karst thermomineral waters , while a geothermometer method has been used for the calculation of primary temperatures in water-bearing horizons(geothermal reservoirs) themselves . 
The carried out research has pointed out that karst thermomineral waters formed in carbonate sediments of Mesozoic age are characterized by temperatures ranging from 15 . 5oC (Knežina Ilidža) to 75oC (Bogatić) , being most frequently of a HCO-Ca , Mg type with neutral to poor alkaline reaction and mineralization below 1 g / l . 
Karst thermomineral waters of the Inner Dinarides are most frequently related to geothermal systems formed in carbonate sediments covered by rocks of poor water permeability . 
In case of some thermomineral water occurrences , the mixing of the karst thermomineral waters with those formed in sedimentary basins occurs due to their hydraulic relation , thus it is not possible to determine only one geothermal system in which they are formed . 
The overall geothermal potential of the thermomineral waters of the Inner Dinarides karst is about 160 Mw . 
In addition to the geothermal aspect , these waters as well as for the needs of bottling . 
The level of research activity and with that the way of the utilisation of these waters are various . with regard to the number of occurrences known so far and their potential , it can be claimed with certainty , that the utilisation of thermomineral water occurring in the karst of the Inner Dinarides will increase significantly in future . 
An example of the multi-purpose utilisation of the Pribojska Banja Spa thermomineral waters illustrates a possible way of doing it . 
Key words: karst , Inner Dinarides , thermomineral water , multi-purpose utilisation . 
