Karst as a criterion for defining areas less suitable for agriculture
ABSTRACT: The proposed European Union indicators for defining areas less suitable for agriculture in Slovenia are not entirely appropriate because taking them into account would omit some distinctly and clearly unsuitable areas – for example , Suha krajina (Dry Carniola) and Bela krajina (White Carniola) – and farmers would be unjustifiably financially harmed . 
In such a case , every European Union member state has the right to propose an additional indicator to reduce such discrepancies . 
With regard to actual natural conditions , in Slovenia especially some karst landscapes would be unjustifiably omitted , and so we have proposed a karst indicator as an additional criterion based on the distribution of karst (i . e . , carbonate) rocks . 
Through spatial coverage of karst rocks and soils , we determined whether more reasonable and less strict application of European criteria regarding soil could be satisfactory for better results in defining areas less suitable for agriculture in Slovenia . 
KEY WORDS: Slovenia , European Union , landscape , karst , agriculture , criteria , less-suitable areas , less favourable areas , areas with limiting factors
1 Introduction
In 1999 the European Union defined three landscape types as areas with natural limitations for agriculture (Council regulation… 1999 , Articles 17 , 18 , 19 , and 20; Review … 2009):
• Mountain areas with a short growing season , steep slopes , and high elevation (encompassing 72 . 3% of Slovenia);
• Areas affected by specific handicaps , which are threatened due to special circumstances and where agriculture is necessary in order to protect the environment , preserve the cultural landscape , especially coasts , and for tourism purposes (10 . 0% of Slovenia);
• Other less-suitable areas with long-term unfertile soil (4 . 0% of Slovenia) . 
This means that 86 . 3% of Slovenia ' s area is classified as areas with natural limitations for agriculture (Report… 2010) . 
In 2005 the European Union defined 91 million ha or 57% of agricultural land as less suitable for farming . 
Although approximately 1 . 4 million people work this land , or only 13% of farmers , the European Union allocates significant funding to these areas . 
Between 2007 and 2013 the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund (EAGGF) allocated € 12 . 6 billion to these areas , which is 13 . 9% of funds earmarked for developing rural areas in the European Union . 
In 2004 payments for agriculture in less-suitable areas ranged between € 15 and € 50 per hectare in Spain , Estonia , Lithuania , Sweden , and Poland , and between € 170 and € 250 per hectare in Austria , Belgium , Finland , and Malta . 
The average payment for agriculture in less-suitable areas in the European Union was € 75 per hectare (Eliasson et al . 
2010) . 
For the majority of European areas with limiting factors for agriculture , it is typical that agriculture is unable to provide a sufficient income , that there are too few jobs in non-agricultural industries , and that the areas have poor connections to administrative centers . 
The consequences are seen in the abandonment of poor-quality land , overgrowth with grass and afforestation , and infrastructure decay . 
Along with worsening economic conditions , social conditions also deteriorate: there are fewer jobs , people move away , and service activities disappear (Cunder 2001) . 
The same is true for Slovenia . 
Recently the European Union placed greater emphasis on areas with poor climate conditions and low soil fertility (LFA… 2012) . 
For placing these areas in various categories of limitations after 2013 , the EU proposed eight common biophysical criteria intended to apply only to Other less-suitable areas (Council regulation…1999 , Article 19) . 
The proposedcriteria are (Commission…2012; Van Orshoven , Terres , & Eliasson 2008; Elliason etal . 
2010; Van Orshoven , Terres , & Toth 2012):
• Low temperature
• Heat stress
• Soil drainage
• Soil texture and stoniness
• Soil rooting depth
• Chemical properties
• Soil moisture balance
• Slope
The criteria are combined into three groups: soil , climate , and terrain . 
In Slovenia , vector data are available that make it possible to define agriculturally less-suitable areas and to calculate the effects of various biophysical criteria for the entire territory of the country . 
Suitable data layers are also available for the entire European Union (European soil … 2012) , but only a few countries have enough precise information available on soil , terrain , and climate (Pásztor , Szabó , & Bakacsi 2010) , which is especially true for Bulgaria and Romania (Elliason etal . 
2010) . 
Because of such a lack of uniformity , some countries oppose the introduction of common criteria for the entire European Union (Towers & Birnie 2009) . 
By many geographical indicators , Slovenia falls among the countries with poor natural conditions for agriculture . 
This is already shown by data for certain terrain indicators , with which nearly all other natural factors are connected . 
A full 91 . 3% of Slovenia is over 200 m above sea level , and 34 . 9% is over 600 m above sea level . 
A full 83 . 7% of Slovenia ' s area has a slope of over 2° , 70 . 5% over 6° , and 50 . 7% over 12° (Perko 2007) . 
Plains cover only 15 . 3% of Slovenia ' s area (Perko 2001) , and even these are threatened by floods (regular flooding in one-tenth of plains , and catastrophic flooding in as much as one-third; Komac , Natek , & Zorn 2008) , and so only just under one-fourth of all agricultural land in Slovenia is located there (Cunder 2001) . 
Nonetheless , with regard to the eight European criteria cited above for determining areas less suitable for agriculture , a significant share of the area and agricultural land in Slovenia where natural conditions are clearly a limiting factor is unjustifiably omitted . 
This is most evident for some karst areas; for example , for Suha krajina (Dry Carniola) . 
Because European Union member states may , as an exception , also propose additional criteria or indicators , at the ZRC SAZU Anton Melik Geographical Institute we have designed a new , additional indicator based on the characteristics of karst terrain , which eliminates some of the shortcomings of the European indicators , which have become evident in Slovenia ' s above-average diversity of landscapes . 
We have thereby also substituted for the lack of certain data in Slovenia for individual European indicators . 
On the basis of this indicator , some areas in Slovenia that would otherwise unjustifiably be omitted according to the proposed European criteria are also categorized among areas less suitable for agriculture . 
We have named this indicator or criterion karst or karstification , and it is categorized among terrain indicators . 
2 Karst
The karstification of Slovenian landscapes is an explicit limiting factor for agriculture that geographers have already emphasized (Gams , Lovrenčak , & Ingolič 1971; Gams 1974; Kladnik & Senegačnik 1983; Gams 1987a , 1991; Kladnik 1998a; Cunder 2001) . 
In their definition of karst landscapes , Kladnik and Senegačnik (1983) took into account the special elements of karst landscapes such as a bare surface , variable soil depth , rugged microterrain , dolines (sinkholes) , flooding of karst poljes , and so on . 
Outwardly , karstification is manifested in a special type of geomorphology that was primarily created through corrosion or the chemical dissolution of carbonate rock , primarily limestone and dolomite . 
For karst landscapes , there is a typical stony surface with dolines , collapse dolines , solution valleys , karst poljes , karst corrosion plains , and dry and blind valleys . 
In common parlance , the Slovenian expression kras škarst’ refers to bare , stony land . 
Karst is most often found on limestone or in areas where limestone alternates with other carbonate rocks , and is less common on other carbonate rocks or where carbonate rock alternates with non-carbonate rocks (Gams 1974; 2003) . 
Limiting factors due to karstification are:
• Terrain features: fine terrain dissection , primarily with dolines and similar corrosion features;
• Water conditions: a lack of surface water due to rapid drainage of water through porous karst rock , resulting in frequent droughts and greater fire danger;
• Soil: discontinuous , rocky , shallow , loamy , of uneven depth and with frequent protruding rocky outcrops and rare deeper pockets;
• Great karst dispersion of small plots of agricultural land , which impedes mechanical cultivation and the adaption of the land-use structure to modern agricultural methods . 
The most characteristic and most numerous depression terrain feature in karst areas is the doline , a funnel-shaped corrosion depression measuring up to 50 m across and up to 10 m deep , with a floor covered with a thick layer of karst clay that is often the non-soluble remnant of chemical dissolution of carbonate rock . 
In addition to these , there are some large solution valleys and karst poljes . 
In many places there are extensive floods in karst poljes; for example , the Cerknica Polje may flood to cover an area of 27 km2 (Kranjc 1986) . 
These are additional limiting factors for agriculture because the flooding may last several months . 
Among the first water-management plans in a Slovenian karst area in the eighteenth and nineteenth century was work to reduce and eliminate flooding in karst poljes , but for the most part these projects were not carried out or completed (Gams 1974) . 
Because of the predominance of subterranean water drainage , surface river networks in karst territory are very rare . 
On limestone karst there is more or less no surface water , and so in many places there is a great lack of water and droughts are frequent . 
Precipitation mostly drains through cracks directly underground , where it creates karst caves . 
The reshaping of karst rock is a result of their fissuring , permeability , and solubility . 
Precipitation absorbs carbon dioxide from the soil , which creates a weak carbonic acid . 
This makes possible dissolution or corrosion already on the surface , and also below ground to some extent . 
Because of this , the karst surface slowly dissolves and decreases in elevation , on average by a few millimeters per century (Mihevc 1998 , 2001 , 2007) . 
With regard to the predominantly carbonate rock , a distinction is made between limestone and dolomite karst . 
Limestone is characterized by a semi-bare surface with intermingled rocky and soil-covered areas . 
The surface is comprised of rounded mountain tops and karst depressions . 
In some places there are more than 100 dolines per km2 , and fewer on less pure limestone . 
In the Karst region , for example , the area between Lipica and Sežana stands out , with a density of as many as 150 dolines per km2 , and near Markovščina in the karst Podgrad Lowland there are even 240 per km2 . 
Dolines are more common in fissured , tectonically fractured areas (Natek et al . 
1983; Šušterič 1984; Fridl etal . 
1996; Gams 2000; Čar 2001)
The surface on limestone is often greatly karstified and so it is also difficult to cultivate in somewhat more level areas . 
The smallest karst features are rills , small parallel solution runnels carved out by precipitation on bare rock in the direction of the greatest flow . 
In a similar manner , karrens also form along the cracks and less resistant parts of the rock . 
In places the rock is so strongly karstified that many rocky horsts protrude from the surface , and rocky talus-covered areas are frequent on slopes and ridges (Gams 2003) . 
Limestone rock exposed to chemical dissolution on the surface has a finely divided and rough surface , whereas limestone rock lying in the soil has a smooth or rounded surface . 
Because of this , everywhere that erosion has removed soil due to human activity it is possible to determine the level to which the soil cover once extended (Gams 1971) . 
In this manner one can also draw conclusions about the intensity of soil erosion , which is often an overlooked geomorphic process in karst areas because water continues to leach the soil under the surface . 
There is often insufficient awareness of the intensity of leaching soil below the surface . 
Especially intense surface leaching of soil takes place on steep slopes during downpours , and so abandoned vineyards often turn into real rocky deserts (Hrvatin et al . 
2006) . 
Soil erosion in karst areas is determined indirectly . 
In flat karst meadows the rock usually protrudes 20 to 30 cm from the earth and that is also the extent of the effect of erosion . 
In vineyards , erosion is usually much greater . 
Soil erosion in karst areas presumably varied during different historical periods . 
After forests were cleared and the soil was first tilled , it was more rapid , but then it gradually slowed down . 
In tilled fields and vineyards in southeast Slovenia it has been determined that the soil thickness is diminishing on average by 1 cm per year (Hrovat 1953) , and on average in Slovenia 3 to 5 tons of soil per hectare of tilled land are lost annually (Komac & Zorn 2005) . 
On dolomite karst , typical karst terrain features are less common and so such karst is usually less distinct than limestone karst . 
Shallow dry valleys , or hollows , are typical . 
In addition to the chemical dissolution of rock , erosion and denudation are also important on dolomite , and so in many places dolomite karst resembles fluvial denudation terrain and is also referred to as fluviokarst (Komac 2003) . 
The surface on carbonate rock is generally less suitable for agriculture . 
Because of its highly dissected and stony surface , cultivating the soil was always connected with great investments in land improvement . 
Sufficient soil depth for tilled fields is only found on the bottom of various types of karst basins , in dry and blind valleys , and on karstified plateaus . 
In the past people tried to improve the cultivation potential by clearing rock from the karst surface . 
If they wanted to be able to mow , the stone had to be removed down to the soil level , and if they wanted to till the land this removal extended into the soil: 20 to 30 cm for an iron plow , and 50 cm for trench plowing . 
The broken-off rock was deposited in shafts and collapse dolines or collected in rockpiles , or dry walls were built from it (Gams 1987b) . 
Among the most widespread improvement efforts in karst areas was doline cultivation , in which their shape was also changed , creating what are known as cultivated dolines . 
Major effort also resulted in cultivated meadows and tilled terraces with retaining walls . 
The extent to which rock was removed from the karst surface can be estimated from the broken-off rock that was built into retaining walls and other walls , and in places also rockpiles . 
Such stone walls often surround cultivated dolines that contained small tilled fields . 
This also protected the crops from grazing animals . 
Often several hundred kilograms of stone were removed per square meter . 
In the Divača Karst region three-quarters of the rock built into walls shows signs of having been broken off (Gams 1991; Kladnik 1998b) . 
The bottoms of cultivated dolines , which have smooth slopes and a sharp , unnatural transition from the slope to the floor , were leveled with soil that was taken from the slopes and nearby area . 
Tilled fields and meadows were preserved the longest in them . 
In the past there was a sharp division between grubbed-out meadows and pastures that had not been cleared of rocks , where the rock sometimes covered more than half of the pasture . 
Cultivated dolines were once an important part of the traditional cultivated landscape; now they are mostly abandoned or contain meadows or pastures . 
They were often surrounded by dry walls . 
The nineteenth-century cadastral map for the village of Lokev in the Karst region shows about 100 circular dry-walled enclosures that protected small tilled fields against animals , leaching by rain , and erosion by the bora wind . 
In the village of Krajna Vas over half of all of the dolines were cultivated (Gams 1987a) . 
The soil that covers the karst surface has an uneven depth and rock often protrudes from it . 
The uneven soil depth is the greatest limiting factor for cultivating karst land . 
Rendzina and chromic cambisol soils predominate on karst; these are often highly leached and contain few carbonates . 
On limestone with chert more acidic and sandy soil has developed , locally referred to as kremenica šcherty terra rossa’ , and on more pure limestone ilovka šloamy terra rossa’ . 
In the central horizon of cherty terra rossa , pedological studies have determined 56 to 75% acidic SiO2 , and in loamy terra rossa only 49 to 57% . 
The share of clay particles in the same horizon is approximately the same: 56 to 75% in cherty terra rossa and 49 to 75% in loamy terra rossa . 
A favorable quality of karst terra rossa is the large volume of colloidal particles , because of which it is able to retain large quantities of water . 
This quality is significantly reduced by larger stony particles , which appear in cultivated karst soils to a large degree due to breaking off rock during land improvement (Hrovat 1953; Gams 1974) . 
When farmers cleared the forest on the semi-bare karst , the cleared land was only useful for grazing . 
Today there is little awareness that the farmers had to pull the karst rock out for the majority of areas used for tilled fields and meadows . 
The extent to which rock was grubbed out of the karst land can be estimated from the amount of broken-off stone found in retaining walls and other walls . 
Until the Second World War , rocks were mostly removed by hand , and up to 200 kg of stone were removed per square meter of land . 
The extent of such land improvement was small and was largely limited to the land in the immediate vicinity of people ' s residences (Gams , Lovrenčak , & Ingolič 1971) . 
After the Second World War , stones started being grubbed out mechanically using excavators and bulldozers (Hrvatin 1985) . 
Mechanical land improvement is a time-consuming and labor-intensive process that generally includes the following phases:
• Clearing forest
• Leveling the surface with heavy bulldozers
• Removing smaller rock by hand
• Mechanical digging and transport of soil
• Mechanical leveling of soil
For example , in the Trebnje region of Dry Carniola the clearing of 2 , 100 ha of land by 1990 involved the removal of 41 , 000 m3 of stone , or 19 . 7 m3 or five tons per hectare . 
When rock is broken up mechanically , many stone fragments remain in the soil , which reduces the soil ' s water-retention capacity and contributes to soil aridity (Gams 2003) . 
Because carbonate rocks are water permeable , agricultural land is often affected by drought during the growing season . 
The lack of a network of surface water prevents any kind of irrigation . 
Soil aridity is further increased by the stone debris , which is often mixed with the soil due to grubbing . 
Fires are also more frequent on karst land because of drought (Ogrin 2002) . 
The literature also includes descriptions of natural conditions less suitable for agriculture on karst in other countries . 
He et al . 
(1998) cited many obstacles faced by agriculture in the Chinese province of Guizhou . 
Among these , they highlighted low soil alkalinity , poor fertility , slow soil formation , shallow soil , and substantial soil erosion , which is the greatest in irrigated areas but is also increased by excessive clearing of forested land . 
They also highlighted accessibility to water resources , which are very threatened due to subterranean drainage and therefore »water becomes as expensive as oil . « In the case of this Chinese province it is also characteristic that the share of agricultural land is small (between 5 and 10%) . 
Ulrich (1989) observed that planning in tropical karst areas differs from planning in other tropical areas and demands special measures . 
He highlighted groundwater maintenance , storage of surface water , unsupervised waste dumping , and the general vulnerability of the ecosystem . 
Because of their mountains and / or karst surface , countries in the western Balkans also have poorer conditions for agriculture (Volk , Rednak , & Erjavec 2010) . 
3 Methodology
In order to define the karst indicator , define areas less suitable for agriculture with regard to the karst indicator , and to determine the connection between karst rocks and soils , we first defined karst lithographic and pedological units . 
A high degree of correlation between karst rocks , on which the karst indicator is based , and karst soils , which satisfy the conditions for the soil criteria , would mean that the (omitted) agricultural land in question could be categorized among areas less suitable for agriculture simply by applying appropriate lithological units , and therefore the introduction of a new criterion – that is , a karst indicator – would not be necessary . 
Specifically , for each individual pedological unit it is possible to determine whether it generally (on average) satisfies the conditions of at least one of the criteria from the soil group (permeability , texture and stoniness , soil rooting depth , chemical properties , and soil moisture balance) for classification as an area less suitable for agriculture . 
The indicator for soil rooting depth , for example , has a borderline value of 30 cm , which means that all types of soil or pedological units in which soil rooting depth usually does not exceed 30 cm satisfy the measure for classification as an area less suitable for agriculture . 
Such borderline criteria are also , for example , that clay particles must exceed 60% or that rock outcrops must extend more than 15 cm above the soil . 
A vector data layer with karst rocks (Zemljevid tipov kamnin… 2012) was prepared based on the vector layer of the 1 : 250 , 000 Lithological Map (Litološka karta) , which we produced based on the Lithostratigraphic Map of Slovenia (Litostratigrafska karta … 2007; 2011 revision) , which in turn was prepared for the Environmental Agency of the Republic of Slovenia primarily based on 1 : 25 , 000 vectorized geological maps of Slovenia produced by the Geological Survey of Slovenia . 
Karst rock types comprise the following lithographic units:
• Massive limestone
• Bedded limestone
• Platy limestone
• Lithothamnium limestone
• Limestone conglomerate
• Limestone and dolomite
• Karst loam
• Dolomite
• Carbonate and clastic rocks
We prepared a vector data layer with karst soils based on the vector layer of the 1 : 250 , 000 Pedological Map (Pedološka karta) , which was produced by the Infrastructure Center for Soil Science and Environmental Protection (TIS / ICPVO – Infrastrukturni center za pedologijo in varstvo okolja , Biotechnical Faculty , University of Ljubljana , Ljubljana 1999–2011) . 
We selected those soils whose characteristics match the measures for all five general European biophysical criteria in the soil group:
Karst soil types comprise the following pedological units:
• Lithosol
• Rendzina on limestone and dolomite
• Rendzina on limestone and dolomite and chromic cambisol
• Rendzina on limestone with chert
• Chromic cambisol on limestone and dolomite
• Chromic cambisol on limestone with chert
• Loamy terra rossa
• Cherty terra rossa
• Luvisol on limestone and dolomite , 
• Luvisol on limestone , acrisol
• Luvisol on conglomerate
We have prepared a contingency table that shows how much karst soils there is on karst rocks and how much on non-karst rocks – or how much karst rocks is under karst soils and how much is under non-karst soils (Table 1) . 
Based on the frequency distribution , we first calculated the statistical indicator hi2 , and from this the statistical indicators r2 (coefficient of determination) and r (correlation coefficient) , which show the level of correlation . 
In a similar manner we also prepared a contingency table only for agricultural land with karst rocks and soils (Table 2) . 
4 Results for all land
In Slovenia , which has an area of 20 , 273 km2 , 9 , 142 km2 (45 . 1%) of the surface has karst rocks and 7 , 975 km2 (39 . 3%) has karst soils . 
The distribution of karst rocks and karst soils alone shows that they are strongly correlated . 
From the contingency table (Table 1) it is clear that a full 91 . 8% of karst soils is on karst rocks , and that 85 . 2% of non-karst soils is on non-karst rocks . 
At the same time , 80 . 1% of karst rocks is below karst soils and a full 94 . 1% of non-karst rocks below non-karst soils . 
Altogether , 36 . 1% of Slovenia is comprised of a combination of karst rocks and karst soils , and 51 . 7% of Slovenia is a combination of non-karst rocks and non-karst soils , which totals 87 . 8% . 
This means that , with regard to data used , a total of 12 . 2% of Slovenia is not one of these combinations or , in other words , barely one-tenth of the area of Slovenia is a combination of karst rocks and non-karst soils , or non-karst rocks and karst soils . 
This high degree of correlation is also confirmed by the correlation coefficient r , which we calculated from hi2 based on over 32 million 25 m× 25 m square cells . 
The value of the correlation coefficient r is 0 . 7555 . 
Both hi2 and r (Table 1) significantly exceed the threshold of their theoretical values at an error probability of 0 . 01 , and therefore it can be concluded with 1% uncertainty or 99% certainty that the spatial distribution of karst rocks and karst soils has a statistically significant correlation . 
5 Results for agricultural land
In the previous section we determined the spatial connection between karst rocks and soils for all land in Slovenia . 
This section only does so for agricultural land . 
In Slovenia there is 6 , 640 km2 of agricultural land (32 . 8% of the country ' s territory) , of which 1 , 927 km2 (29% of this land) is on karst rocks and 1 , 438 km2 (21 . 7%) is on karst soils . 
The very distribution of karst rocks and karst soils shows that they are strongly correlated . 
From the contingency table (Table 2) it is clear that a full 90 . 8% of karst soils is on karst rocks and that 88 . 1% of non-karst soils is on non-karst rocks . 
At the same time , 67 . 8% of karst rocks is under karst soils and a full
97 . 2% of non-karst rocks is under non-karst soils . 
These are therefore the proportions that apply to karst land on karst rocks and karst soils in Slovenia . 
A high degree of correlation is also confirmed by the correlation coefficient r , which we calculated from hi2 based on over 32 million 25 m× 25 m square cells . 
The value of the correlation coefficient r is 0 . 7159 . 
Both hi2 and r (Table 2) significantly exceed the threshold of their theoretical values at an error probability of 0 . 01 , and therefore it can be concluded with 1% uncertainty or 99% certainty that the spatial distribution of karst rocks and karst soils has a statistically significant correlation . 
This means that the spatial distribution of karst rocks and soils has a statistically significant correlation overall , for all land (0 . 7555) as well as for only agricultural land (0 . 7159) , or that there is no significant difference between the correlation coefficients . 
6 Conclusion
For the comprehensive evaluation of agricultural land it is necessary to take into account the karst indicator because karst areas are characterized by special cultivation conditions . 
Despite the rather high level of precipitation in karst areas in Slovenia , the water permeability of karst rock and primarily subterranean water flow makes supplying water difficult . 
Because of the low concentration of insoluble components in the rock , soil is formed more slowly on limestone than on other types of rock , and erosion is also frequent in clear-cut karst areas . 
The surface on karst rock is therefore covered with relatively shallow soil and the share of stony material in it is exceptionally large . 
Since time immemorial , farmers have had to improve the soil (e . g . , by grubbing out rock) in order to achieve better agricultural conditions in at least some places . 
Agriculture is also encumbered by the great vulnerability of the karst ecosystem . 
Possible overuse of mineral fertilizers and pesticides can be very dangerous because in karst areas substances are leached directly under the ground , from where they end up in karst springs , which are the only sources of drinking water in karst regions . 
It is understandable that taking into account these characteristics of karst rock is necessary in evaluating Slovenian agricultural land . 
The karst indicator that we have defined is based on the lithological composition of the surface and takes into account the areas of karst rock; that is , rock on which karst has formed . 
We used these areas to calculate the share of karst area in Slovenian cadastral districts and to determine a high degree of correlation between karst rocks and karst soils . 
This correlation justifies the possibility that an indicator could also be based on karst soil defined with the help of a pedological map . 
The areas less suitable for agriculture should completely include cadastral districts in which at least two-thirds of agricultural land is located on karst rock . 
In Slovenia , among 2 , 697 cadastral districts , there are 561 , or one-fifth (20 . 8%) , in which at least two-thirds of the agricultural land is in areas less suitable for farming based on the karst indicator . 
The total area of agricultural land in these 561 districts is 148 , 677 ha (of which 133 , 122 ha is on karst rock) , which is 22 . 4% of all agricultural land in Slovenia . 
Among the Slovenian areas with the poorest natural conditions for agriculture we also rank White Carniola and Dry Carniola based on the karst indicator , which under the proposed eight European general biophysical criteria would be almost entirely omitted from areas less suitable for agriculture without this indicator . 
In White Carniola and Dry Carniola there are 77 cadastral districts in which more than two-thirds of agricultural land is on karst rock . 
In Dry Carniola only one cadastral district – or 3 . 1% of the territory or 3 . 0% of agricultural land in the region – is not classified as an area less suitable for agriculture , and in White Carniola there are six such cadastral districts , encompassing 10 . 6% of the territory or 16 . 7% of the agricultural land . 
Considering that a large part of Slovenia is omitted from areas less suitable for agriculture when the karst indicator is not taken into consideration , such an indicator is essential for consistent evaluation of Slovenian agricultural land and , connected with this , the opportunity to receive nearly € 10 million in European Union subsidies . 
As long as the European Union continues to consider mountain areas (Council regulation… 1999 , Article 18) as less-suitable areas , disregarding the karst indicator will not be so critical for Slovenia as a whole , except for the karst regions of Dry Carniola and White Carniola , already mentioned several times , where farmers would not receive subsidies for farming less-suitable areas under clearly unfavorable conditions for agriculture . 
However , if the criteria for defining mountain areas , which encompass nearly three-quarters of Slovenia , are made stricter or even eliminated , the negative financial consequences for Slovenia and for many farmers would be very great , and this could have a significant effect on deterioration of the cultural landscape and depopulation of a considerable part of Slovenian territory . 
The karst indicator therefore makes it possible , under new criteria for defining areas less suitable for agriculture , for Slovenia to preserve or justifiably even slightly increase its share of agricultural land classified as being in less-suitable areas , and thereby also the level of European funding for its development . 
