Active and relict alluvial fans on contact karst of the Vrhpoljska brda hills, Slovenia
ABSTRACT: Several types of contact karst are found within the Slovenian karst, but the most common is the ponor type, which usually develops at boundaries between flysch and limestone.
One of these types is in the area of Vrhpoljska brda.
In this contact karst area two types of alluvial fans appear on carbonate bedrock.
Members of the first type are ordinary alluvial fans with active alluvial processes where flysch derived sediment covered limestone surface in a distinct fan shape.
The other type, described as relict alluvial fans, is fan-shaped features preserved in the carbonate bedrock.
These essentially bedrock landforms developed as a result of the gradual removal of pre-existing alluvial fan cover and the concurrent but non-uniform chemical denudation of the underlying carbonate bedrock.
Geomorphologic and morphometric description of alluvial fans and relict alluvial are provided in the article and mechanisms of relict alluvial fans formation and transformation are discussed.
KEY WORDS: karst, contact karst, alluvial fan, relict alluvial fan, Vrhpoljska brda, Kras, Slovenia
1 Introduction
In Slovenia the most common type of contact karst is the ponor type, where waters from a non-karstic catchment flow onto the karst surface.
Such type of karst has developed where the non-karstic surface is at a higher elevation and where the hydraulic gradient of water is directed into the karst and is steeper than the surface gradient (Mihevc 1991).
Surface karst features typical of Slovenian ponor type contact karst are blind valleys, ponor steepheads (Mihevc 1991), trough valleys, karst plains (Gams 2001) and collapse dolines (Stepišnik 2006).
Caves within contact karst areas contain allogenic rivers and have sub-horizontal passages of epiphreatic origin.
Extensive segments of unroofed sub-horizontal caves have been found on the karst surface (Mihevc 2001).
Investigation of contact karst in the area of Vrhpoljska brda in western Slovenia included study of the processes active on contact karst in the specific hydrological situations where alluvial fans occur.
Some of the fans on the study area are undergoing active alluvial sedimentation, with flysch-derived sediment covering the limestone bedrock to produce landforms that are a typical fan-shape in ground plan.
Other fans are not composed of sediment typical of fluvial alluvial fans, but are fan-like surface features standing proud of the general carbonate bedrock surface.
Those fan-like features superimposed upon carbonate bedrock were defined as relict alluvial fans (Stepišnik et al.
2007).
The morphology, morphometry and spatial distribution of alluvial fans on the study area contact karst were studied in detail.
The study involved geomorphological mapping of the fans and their hydrological hinterland to establish extent and location of alluvial fans, extent of flysch derived alluvium and surface morphology of the fans.
Morphometric survey included measuring of long profiles of the fans.
The main purpose of the paper is to describe alluvial fans and relict alluvial fans as contact karst features and to provide some morphological and morphometric properties of the fans.
The aim of the research is to deduct on basis of fieldwork data, which are the mechanisms of alluvial fan formation and mechanisms and reasons for transformation to the relict ones.
The aim is also to provide some evidence why on the contact karst alluvial fans instead of blind valleys are formed.
2 Area of Vrhpoljska brda
The Vrhpoljska brda hills are situated at the southernmost part of the Karst plateau.
This area extends over a 6.5 km-long ridge, which stretches from Videž above Kozina across Veliko Gradišče towards the hill of Kokoš, covering an area of some 23 km2.
The ridge is at elevation of about 620 m, which is around 200 m higher than the surrounding area (Fig.
1).
The upper part of the Vrhpoljska brda hills comprises of Eocene flysch brachysyncline surrounded by Paleocene and Upper Cretaceous bedded limestone.
Flysch is exposed across an area of about 0.7 km2 on the highest part of the ridge around Veliko Gradišče.
Many inherited fluvial features such as erosion gullies and alluvial fans indicate that the flysch cover was once more extensive, but most of it has already been removed by denudation.
The main ridge of the Vrhpoljska brda hills branches into smaller ridges that lie south and southeast of Veliko Gradišče.
Two valleys flanking the ridge that branches from the top of Veliko Gradišče are infilled with alluvial sediment.
The valleys, Gročansko polje to the west and Vrhpoljsko polje to the east, are morphologically similar.
Their northern parts are covered by small coalescing alluvial fans overlying carbonate bedrock at the ends of numerous erosion gullies that are incised into flysch bedrock.
Central parts of the valleys are flat and approximately 250 m wide.
Most of the surface water from the valleys drains into number of ponors on the contact between flysch-derived alluvium and carbonate bedrock.
The southern floors of the valleys extend on to the planated karst surface.
Though both valleys function as border karst poljes or blind valleys, realistically their dimensions are too small to fit the usual definition of a polje, and they do not have the distinct terminal steepheads that would allow them to be defined as blind valleys.
3 Types of alluvial fans in the area
According to standard geomorphological literature, alluvial fans are river accumulation landforms that are cone-shaped in long profile and fan-shaped in ground plan.
They form where feeder channels leave a narrow valley and enter a wider valley or plain.
Velocity of stream and its transportation capacity are decreased, and much of the sediment load is deposited (Summerfield 1996; Goudie 2004).
There are many sub-types of alluvial fans, according to their shape and age of development (Gams 1964; Gams 2001; Sauro 2001; Goudie 2004), although alluvial fan sedimentation is a specific process.
The decrease in water flow velocity results in deposition of larger sediment clasts in the upper, proximal sections and finer sediment in the lower, distal sections.
A typical alluvial fan has a concave long profile with a slope inclination of up to 10 degrees in its upper sections and from 1 to 5 degrees in its lower sections (Bull 1977; Summerfield 1996; Goudie 2004).
Two general types of alluvial fan occur in the study area (Figure 2).
The first comprises fans undergoing active alluvial sedimentation from the flysch hinterland onto the karst area.
Their thickness, internal structure and long profiles correspond to those of typical fluvial system alluvial fans.
Upper parts of fans have an inclination of up to 5 degrees, with the inclinations decreasing with down slope distance.
The structure of the upper part of the fan profile consists of layers of gravel, sand and loam, whereas the outer, flatter, sections comprise loamy material.
The second type of alluvial fans in the karst is relict alluvial fans (Stepišnik et al.
2007).
Their ground plan shapes are fan-like, and their long profiles are also distinct in shape, with concave upper sections that become convex in the middle and lower parts.
Slopes reach 11 degrees in the upper sections, whereas the middle parts are relatively flattened and the surface slopes of the outer areas reach 12 degrees.
In typical active alluvial fans alluvium thickness decreases with distance from the upper sections, whereas alluvial deposits cover only the concave upper sections of the relict alluvial fans.
Outer areas of the relict fans are convex and the limestone bedrock has no alluvial cover.
Density of surface karst features increases with distance from current edge of surviving alluvial cover.
However, some relict alluvial fans are completely or almost without alluvial cover even in their upper sections, and their entire long profile is convex.
3.1 Active alluvial fans
The study area includes two active fans south of the Vrhpoljska brda hills in the northern parts of Gročana and Vrhpoljsko poljes (Figure 3).
The fan at Gročana covers an area of 0.2 km2 and the fan near Vrhpolje covers 0.16 km2 (Fig.
4 and Fig.
5).
Erosion gullies with intermittent water flow have cut through flysch and carbonate bedrock at the upper ends of the fans, which are completely covered with flysch-derived alluvium.
The upper parts of the fans are steepest, with inclinations of up to 4 degrees, whereas the outer fan sections merge into the flat alluvial surfaces of the Gročana and Vrhpolje poljes.
3.2 Relict alluvial fans
Relict alluvial fans are found in the northern and eastern part of Vrhpoljska Brda.
Their ground plans are fan-shaped, and they have a distinctive long profile.
Their upper parts are concave but in the middle and outer sections they become convex.
The slopes of the upper sections reach 11 degrees, whereas the middle areas are relatively flattened.
Surface slopes in the outer parts of the fans reach 12 degrees.
The convex outer sections comprise limestone bedrock with no alluvial cover.
The density of surface karst features increases with distance from the edge of the alluvial cover.
There are four relict alluvial fans in the northern part of the Vrhpoljska brda hills, each with one or more erosion gullies in its hinterland.
Most of the gullies are inactive and incised into carbonate bedrock, as the flysch bedrock has been completely denuded, but the upper sections of some of the eastern gullies are still within flysch bedrock so they still carry periodic water flow.
In the western part of the area, at the foot of Mount Kokoš, is the relict alluvial fan known as Karamonke, with an area of around 0.57 km2 (Figure 6).
Its apex lies at the end of a dry erosion gulley that is carved completely into carbonate bedrock, with the original flysch bedrock completely removed by erosion.
A small patch of flysch-derived alluvium is preserved on the upper part of the fan.
Inclinations of long profile are 4 degrees in the upper section, reaching 14 degrees in the outer areas.
As this relict alluvial fan retains hardly any alluvial cover, it is completely convex.
Surface karst features are virtually absent on its upper sections, whereas many are found on the outer areas of the fan.
The margins of the fan extend into the flat Karst plateau, which is also densely covered with surface karst features.
The relict Obrovnik alluvial fan lies 1.5 km to the east of Karamonke (Figure 7).
Its apex is at the foot of an erosion gulley that is incised completely in carbonate bedrock, but the upper section of the gulley lies near a remnant patch of flysch bedrock.
The upper part of the fan, which is about 300 m long, is covered with flysch-derived alluvium.
Carbonate bedrock is exposed in the middle of the fan and the lower section has a rocky surface with a high density of dolines and grikes.
Slope inclinations reach 11 degrees in the upper part of the fan, average 6 degrees in the middle area and are up to 12 degrees in the outer convex sections.
The outer sections extend gradually into the flat surface of the karst plateau.
The biggest relict alluvial fan in the study area has an area 1.8 km2 and is situated near the village of Lokev (Figure 8).
Its upper part is situated at the ends of two erosion gullies with their upper parts incised into flysch bedrock.
Flysch-derived alluvium is preserved on the upper part of the fan, where slope inclinations reach 8.5 degrees.
Isolated carbonate bedrock grikes are exposed in the middle section, where slope inclinations are around 2 degrees.
Outer areas of the fan are inclined at up to 9 degrees, with carbonate bedrock exposed at the surface and grikes and dolines present.
The fan terminates against the foothill of Taborska brda in the north, and merges into the flat karst surface towards the northwest (Fig.
9).
The Zavodi relict alluvial fan covers an area of 1.1 km2 and is essentially polymorphic.
Its apex is lies at the end of an erosion gully that is carved in flysch bedrock.
It is a typical relict alluvial fan, with almost no alluvial cover in the upper section.
Its long profile is completely convex with inclinations of around 2 degrees in the upper parts and around 6 degrees in the outer areas.
Bedrock is exposed right across the fan, and grikes and dolines are abundant (Figure 10).
A 10 m-deep and up to 120 m-wide valley that is carved into the western part of the fan extends to its outer edge, where it disappears into a series of deep dolines.
Periodically the valley carries water from the erosion gulley above, and is partly filled with flysch alluvium.
Two relict alluvial fans on the eastern part of the Vrhpoljska brda are densely covered with surface karst features.
They are identified as relict alluvial fans in the karst surface on the basis of their ground plans and slope inclinations.
The northernmost fan, known as Boršt, covers an area of 0.44 km2 (Figure 11).
There are many dolines on the fan's apex, which lies below a relict erosion gully, whereas many larger dolines cover the entire upper section of the fan.
The entire long profile of the fan is convex with slope inclinations of around 1 degree in the upper parts and around 5 degrees in the outer areas.
Carbonate bedrock covered with grikes and dolines is exposed across the entire fan surface.
The fan's margins merge into the flattened karst surface of northwestern Matarsko podolje (Figure 7).
The Dukovce relict alluvial fan, which has an area of 0.19 km2, lies 0.5 km farther south, with its doline-covered apex at the end of an erosion gulley (Figure 12).
Carbonate bedrock with many dolines and grikes is exposed across the whole fan surface.
The fan's long profile is convex with slope inclinations of up to 3 degrees in the upper section and up to 6 degrees in the outer areas.
4 Conclusion
Detailed investigation of the contact karst in the Vrhpoljska brda hills area revealed that the process of alluvial fan formation is in general the same on karstic as in non-karstic fluvial geomorphological systems.
Active alluvial fans are related to the present process regime.
They are being formed because the flysch outcrops of the Vrhpoljska brda hills stand high above the flat karst surface.
Intensive erosional processes on the higher ground resulted in generation of flysch debris and subsequent input of alluvial material to the karst flat.
Due to the concentrated material input the sediment-laden waters deposit alluvial fans rather than forming blind valleys.
The characteristic long profile of the relict alluvial fans is the result of significant reduction or total cessation of deposition of flysch-derived residual sediment and water inflow in the fan area.
In the study area it is a result of a partial or complete denudation of flysch bedrock in which feeder channels were formed.
Subsequent denudation effects on the residual alluvial cover on the fans appear to be less intense than those affecting the neighboring karst surface where limestone bedrock is exposed.
Thus, denudation lowering appears to be less rapid on alluvial fan surfaces that remain covered with flysch-derived deposits than on the non alluvium covered karst surface.
This difference in denudation rates results in the distinctive shape of the fan long profiles.
Such fans exhibit typical long profiles only in their upper sections, where relatively thick alluvial cover is preserved.
Where the alluvial cover is denuded the dynamics of limestone bedrock corrosion are intense and, thus, surface lowering is more rapid.
Alluvial cover thickness diminishes with distance from the uppermost section of the fan, so the alluvial cover on the margins of the fan will be the first to be denuded, exposing the bedrock to corrosion.
Subsequently, sediment will gradually be removed back towards the core of the fan and more and more carbonate bedrock will be exposed, resulting in the development of the typical convex long profile.
The final outcome, if all alluvial cover is removed, is a bedrock geomorphic feature that is fan shaped in ground plan and convex in long profile; in this article, we term it relict alluvial fan.
The bedrock feature that has been developed as a final outcome is a kind of pseudomorph that has inherited the form of the original alluvial fan.
Relict alluvial fans embossed upon the karst surface have not previously been interpreted as landforms typical of contact karst, even though the process of their formation is exclusively related to contact karst.
The fans in the study area can be used as type examples to aid the interpretation of alluvial fan formation mechanisms on other dynamic karst surfaces.
