Relief evolution in the hinterland of the Pivka river
ABSTRACT: The article discusses relief evolution in the catchment area of the highest situated permanent spring of the Pivka river – the Pivšce karst spring near the village Zagorje . 
The discussed landscape , which lies on the southernmost edge of the Upper Pivka valley , shows several geomorphological particularities , which are the result of different geomorphogenetic processes in the past . 
The basic characteristics of the present relief were shaped in the Pliocene when also the original valley of the Pivka river was formed . 
The region was more profoundly transformed by Pleistocene processes , which strongly altered the surface . 
Apart from karstic relief forms , there are several small dry stream channels on the land surface , which were carved by torrents . 
The two most distinctive relief features are the karst polje situated between the villages Koritnice , Bač and Knežak , which is covered with rubble and gravel-like clastic sediments , and the dry valley of the former Pivka river lying southwest from Koritnice . 
KEY WORDS: geomorphology , relief , karst , Pleistocene , Pivka , Knežak , Snežnik , Slovenia . 
1 Introduction
The Pivka basin is a large depression surrounded by the high karst plateaus Nanos , Hrušica , Javorniki , Snežnik and Slavenski ravnik and the flysch basin of the Reka river . 
The southern part – the Upper Pivka valley – is a depression , about 16 km long and 4–5 km wide , which stretches upstream from the settlement Prestranek and is mainly composed of Cretaceous limestone (Mulec et al . 
2005) . 
The landscape is given its character by the Pivka river with its unstable course . 
Due to the presence of the fine-grained river alluvia which cover the riverbed of the Pivka and the bottoms of larger karst depressions , and given the fact that the rocks are , in some places , less permeable and underground flowing is relatively poor , the prevailing karst relief is , in some places , combined with the elements of fluvial relief . 
This is reflected in the many intermittent karst lakes , the unstable course of the Pivka and nearby flooding . 
The Pivka rises from the Pivšca karst spring (555 m) near the village Zagorje . 
The catchment area of this highest situated permanent spring of the Pivka covers the southernmost part of the Upper Pivka valley , which , towards the south and east , continues into the deeply karstified plateau Snežnik , which forms the watershed between the Adriatic (the karst springs Podstenjšek and Bistrica) and Black (the Pivka river) Seas . 
To the west , the upper part of the basin of the Pivka is bounded by the Taborski hrbet ridge (Gora) , which forms a geological and relief boundary between limestone regions and the flysch regions of Brkini and the Reka valley . 
The upper part of the basin of the abovementioned spring abounds with special geomorphological features , as some elements of fluvial relief are also present in the area with prevailing karst relief , especially in those parts where flat land converges into the slopes of the Snežnik plateau . 
These elements are the result either of a different bedrock (a flysch tectonic window near Knežak) or different geomorphogenetic processes in the past , especially in the Pleistocene , which have left traces in the surface stream of the former Pivka and other torrents . 
Today , this is evidenced by dry valleys and many fossil ravines . 
With the exception of the mainly flat , rubble and gravel-covered karst polje situated between the villages Koritnice , Knežak and Bač , karst relief with dolines of different shapes and sizes prevails . 
Most of these dolines are shallow and have inconspicuous edges , which gradually continue into somewhat higher and flatter land . 
In some places there are conical-shaped hills . 
There is no recent literature regarding relief evolution in the discussed area; therefore , the article is based on a critical review of existing investigations , which , however , are not supported by the latest geomorphological methods and knowledge about the karst relief evolution . 
The author has conducted detailed field mapping of the area , giving most emphasis to the study of the processes of relief transformation in the Pleistocene . 
He has undertaken to integrate field observations and results into the theories of relief evolution in the discussed area . 
These theories still need to be confirmed by other geomorphological methods , possibly through examination of sediments . 
2 Geological setting
Medium to well permeable Upper Cretaceous limestones prevail in the region (Figure 2) . 
The dry valley above Koritnice and the upper parts of its margins are composed of dolomite-limestone breccia , which is somewhat more resistant to weathering . 
In the valley and its surroundings also grained dolomite can be found , which weathers very fast . 
The presence of well tectonically crushed dolomite (the valley is developed along the Selce fault) probably contributed to the faster deepening of the former Pivka river dry valley above Koritnice , especially in the Pleistocene , when strong mechanical weathering was taking place (Šikić et al . 
1972; Šikić and Pleničar 1975; Krivic et al . 
1983) . 
The Taborski hrbet ridge is built mostly of Upper Cretaceous light crystalline limestone , as well as of less permeable Paleogene dark limestone , and somewhere marly limestone characterized by karstic and karst-fissured porosity can be found . 
In the tectonic window near Knežak , Eocene flysch rocks outcrop to the surface (Pleničar 1959) . 
In the tectonic sense , the flysch rocks are a fraction of the recumbent fold of the Komen thrust sheet , which lies underneath the overthrust of the Snežnik thrust sheet , built mostly of Upper Cretaceous limestone (Placer 1981) . 
The flysch barrier in the base of this area prevents karst water from flowing away underground from the discussed region towards the Reka river and directs the ground waters into the Pivka river basin . 
The Podstenjšek karst spring is an exception . 
The presence of underlying flysch rocks , which outcrop in the tectonic windows near Knežak and Zagorje and whose existence is additionally evidenced by a well near Zagorje situated only 2300 m from the thrust edge , at a depth of 100 m , is probably the reason for the formation of a shallow karst aquifer , which enables the rise of karst groundwater to the surface during high waters . 
Flysch rocks near Knežak cover an area of 0 . 2 km2 and are an exception in the discussed area . 
The flysch surface is altered by several small streams , which have short channels . 
Some of the streams are even captured for local drinking water supply . 
At the foothill , the streams converge into an uplifted artificial ditch , which is inundated only in rainy season . 
At the end of the ditch , the stream sinks into the ponor Kneške ponikve , where underground water connection with the intermittent Videmščica karst spring near Zagorje has been proved (Habič 1975) . 
The karst depression between Koritnice , Bač and Knežak is covered with unconsolidated rubble and gravel clastic sediments , which in some places exceed 10 m of depth . 
In the Pleistocene , the material was accumulated by the former Pivka river in an alluvial fan at the exit of its source valley . 
According to its morphology , the abovementioned karst depression can be classified as a karst polje since it has the main characteristics of karst poljes as defined in Slovenian karst terminology) (Gams 1973) , less distinctive being only its shape . 
In addition , Quaternary sediments cover the bottoms of other larger karst depressions . 
Beside the abovementioned well-defined thrusting deformation of the Snežnik thrust sheet over the Komen thrust sheet , the discussed area is dissected also by several other , less distinctive faults . 
The source valley of the former Pivka river is formed along the Selce fault . 
Southwest from the lake Šembijsko jezero is the Šembije fault . 
Frequent earthquakes that occur along the faults at a depth from 7–17 km (Vidrih et al . 
1996; Cecić et al . 
1999) confirm that the area is tectonically still very active . 
3 Relief evolution in the Pliocene
The elongated Pivka basin was predominately shaped by the erosional activity of the Pliocene Pivka river , which formed a 3–4 km wide valley extending from the village Koritnice towards the town Postojna (Melik 1951; 1955) . 
In the east , it is surrounded by the Javorniki plateau (1268 m asl) , whereas its upper part lies on the slopes of the Snežnik plateau (1796 m asl) . 
The western side of the basin is bounded by the Volovja reber ridge with the peak of Velika Milanja (1099 m asl) , which is part of the Snežnik plateau , and by the Taborski hrbet ridge stretching between the settlement Šembije and the hill Primož (718 m asl) above the settlement Pivka . 
According to Melik , this is a long normal valley of the Pliocene Pivka , which once ran from the upper part of the basin situated in the elevated Snežnik plateau underneath the peaks of Velika Milanja and Devin (1028 m asl) towards Postojnska vrata (the Postojna Gap) and onwards to the basin of the Ljubljanica river . 
This is evidenced by a terrace stretching eastwards from the settlements Pivka , Zagorje and Knežak , and featuring wide , levelled ridges and smaller round-shaped peaks lying at an elevation of between 610 and 630 m . 
Today , the surface stream of the Pivka is preserved only in the lowest parts of Upper Pivka . 
The orographic watershed between the Pivka river basin and the Reka river basin in the south is about the same age . 
It is well expressed with a relief barrier extending from the hill Osojnica across the Taborski hrbet ridge and onwards across the lower surface around Šembijsko jezero towards the Volovja reber ridge . 
In the carbonate bedrock , karstic runoff has developed , with groundwater running towards the basins of the Adriatic and Black Seas (Habič 1968) . 
On the southern side of Volovja reber is a dry hanging valley , created by a onetime stream , which probably flowed into the Reka river basin during the Pliocene . 
Since it was less subjected to erosion in the past , and , on the other hand , also strongly modified by recent karstification , the discussed valley is , compared with the dry valley above Koritnice , less markedly incised into the surrounding surface . 
According to the morphology of the area , it can be presumed that the former tributary of the Reka joined its basin (flysch bedrock) somewhere in the area called žlebovi lying to the north of Ilirska Bistrica . 
Žlebovi is an erosional gap in the thrust edge , where the flysch bedrock indents for about 700 m inwards into the limestone bedrock of the Snežnik plateau . 
Similar limestone erosional gaps can be observed along the entire thrust edge , however the discussed one is the most evident one . 
It was formed by the faster erosional lowering of flysch rocks , which caused headward erosion and the prolongation of the valley into the limestone on the flysch-limestone joint . 
Later , the surface runoff was interrupted and groundwater circulation developed . 
Similar dry and hanging valleys are also found in other parts of Upper Pivka , showing the existence of Pliocene surface streams flowing into the Pivka river valley . 
Vlačno and the valley between Jurišče and Palčje are the most obvious (Habič 1968) . 
The formation of surface drainage on carbonate rocks was possible due to the impermeable layers of Tertiary rocks , which , in the Pliocene , on all sides bounded limestones , which , as a result , lied in a lower position and were blocked (Radinja 1972) . 
Such conditions hindered the process of vertical corrosion . 
Therefore , groundwater circulation did not develop . 
The Pliocene fluvial phase was followed by the karstification period in the conditions of subtropical and tropical climate (Melik 1951; Habič 1968) . 
This can be deduced from the preserved land features and the processes which are nowadays in progress in tropical karst areas in the world (Radinja 1972) . 
The erosional activity of the Pivka , its tributaries and the tributaries of the Reka , which developed a regular surface drainage pattern in the discussed area , was replaced by the corrosion activity of aggressive precipitation water , which exhausted its strength soon after it had started to flow underground . 
A series of hanging terraces on different elevations on the western side of the Javorniki indicates the multi-stage lowering of the surface as well as the deepening of the Pivka valley (Habič 1968) . 
The older , higher terrace of the Pivka river lying at elevations of 600–650 m was intensively transformed by karst processes , which is evidenced by a somewhat dissected surface where several dolines have developed . 
The former valley on the southern side of Volovja reber also transformed into a hanging valley , which is now situated 100 m above the depression of Šembijsko jezero . 
This former valley was transformed by subsequent karstification . 
Therefore , many dolines are present mainly at the bottom of the valley , while , due to inclination , fewer of them are found on the slopes . 
The latter are usually also of less regular shapes . 
In contrast with the other valleys in Upper Pivka , the source valley of the Pliocene Pivka above Koritnice is opened towards the karst polje between Koritnice , Bač and Knežak . 
It seems that its evolution and deepening have not been interrupted . 
As was probably the case with the other fossil valleys , the discussed one was also hanged above the lower surface in the first phase of karstification . 
However , due to the intensive erosional activity of Pleistocene torrents , it was re-deepened to the level of the already mentioned karst polje , and the load of the torrents accumulated in the form of an alluvial fan at the end of the valley . 
The former bottom of the source valley of the Pliocene Pivka could be the pass (750 m asl) on the western side of the conical peak Strma reber (822 m asl) . 
Following this explanation , the ending part of the valley on the eastern part of the abovementioned peak would only be the result of very intensive erosional deepening during the Pleistocene . 
One of the most probable explanations is that , through the entire Pliocene period , the surface flow of the Pivka was preserved at the bottom of Upper Pivka . 
Subsequent karstification lead to the forma tion of a system of karst springs in the area around Koritnice , which hindered the fossilification of the mountain valley above Koritnice . 
At that time , karst springs , which created a pocket valley called Raša and a less pronounced pocket valley under the church of St . Hieronymus (698 m asl) , were active . 
The size of the Raša pocket valley shows that the valley must have been created by a water-abundant spring . 
The catchment area of the abovementioned springs was the higher positioned karstified part of the Snežnik plateau with already developed karst drainage . 
In such conditions , it was possible that there was a sink ing river at the bottom of a more or less homogeneous karst polje , which probably extended from the springs near Koritnice to the ponors in the Postojnska jama cave , but there is no solid evidence to confirm this theory . 
The bottom of the dry Raša valley is several metres wide and on the western side reaches up to 50 m . 
The spring lies at an elevation of 740 m . 
At the spring , the valley is deeply cut into the surrounding surface for about 20 m . 
Somewhat downstream , it is even deeper and wider . 
The valley is approximately 600 m long and its starts with a 10 m high wall . 
The erosional power of the former flow must have been considerable , since it formed such a remarkable relief feature in the relatively undissected surrounding surface . 
There is a lot of rubble on the slopes , collected in small screes . 
The edge of the valley is in some places bounded by 8 m high walls . 
Slightly above the ending wall of the Raša valley there is a 1 km long shallow and dry stream channel cut into the rocky bottom of the surface . 
Its creation is related to one of the previous karstification phases in the region , when several karst springs on different elevations were active in Upper Pivka . 
With the lowering of the water table , the karst spring in the Raša valley became active and created a deep valley , while the channel of the higher situated karst spring hanged above it and remained preserved until today . 
Habič (1968) also writes about pocket valleys on different elevations that were created along karst tributaries under the Snežnik and Javorniki plateau . 
Morphologically , the dry channel above the Raša valley is very similar to the shallow trough-shaped stream channels in the hinterland of Šembijsko jezero , which are of much younger origin . 
I do not exclude the possibility that the intensive deepening of the Raša valley also dates to the Pleistocene period . 
Isolated hills (»humi«) , which are situated within the karst polje between Koritnice , Bač and Knežak and on its margins , give evidence of the Pliocene karst phase . 
Viewed from above , the conical-shaped hills have the shape of a more or less regular circle . 
The hills gently rise above the surrounding levelled surface . 
Such hills are Velika Obroba (644 m asl) , Mala Obroba (641 m asl) and the neighbouring hill situated at an elevation of 644 m . 
Their almost identical elevation testifies to their common origin . 
Well noticeable are also Galaričica and Obrobca (both 600 m asl) . 
In the vicinity there are also some other isolated hills on higher elevations . 
The karstified base of the bottom of the karst polje between Koritnice , Bač and Knežak has been confirmed by investigations conducted in wells (Krivic et al . 
1983) . 
Small karst caves filled with clay can be seen on different depths , while closer to the surface some of the conduits are also filled with limestone debris . 
At the same time , the Pliocene karst surface of the Pivka basin was altered by erosion-denudation and corrosion morphogenetic processes with intensive corrosion planation . 
Both processes supplemented each other and led , on the one hand , to the development of dolines , which became increasingly deeper due to the lowering of gradient , and on the other hand , to the development of terraces on different elevations . 
4 Relief evolution in the Pleistocene
In his study of Slovenian karst poljes , Melik (1955) established that , during the Pleistocene , the mechanical weathering and disintegration of carbonate rocks on the surface intensified due to very frequent fluctuation in air temperature around zero and intensive freezing , which occurred mainly on higher elevations . 
Therefore , a lot of rock debris accumulated on the surface , which was either denuded to lower positions by solifluction or washed away by running water . 
Due to the filling up of caves , shafts and ponors , surface drainage was re-established and the dry valleys became active again . 
Among the factors contributing to the interruption of the karstification process was also the frozen ground , whereas , due to the impoverished soil and vegetation coverage , corrosion mainly took place in fractures . 
In periglacial regions (the discussed area) , chemical weathering was therefore rather weak , which , geomorphologically speaking , means a weakening of the karstification process . 
The predomination of mechanical weathering , solifluction and denudation led to the filling up of existing swallow holes . 
A clear example is the karst polje Grobničko polje above the city of Rijeka in Croatia , where Pleistocene torrents incised some deep and narrow gorges and thickly filled the karst polje with debris . 
Moreover , the structure of accumulated material suggests that the karst polje was subject to periodical inundation (Šikić and Pleničar 1975) . 
There is a similar assumption , according to which there was a Pleistocene lake lying between Koritnice , Bač and Knežak (Cumin 1929; Melik 1955) and extending in two branches from Koritnice to Knežak and Bač , but no solid evidence is available to confirm this . 
The presence of fine-grained lake sediments has not been proven by wells (Krivic at al . 
1983) . 
Therefore , it is difficult to speak about a long lasting inundation of the karst polje . 
On the other hand , we cannot exclude the possibility of periodical inundations in the Pleistocene , similar to the present-day flooding of karst poljes , during which the debris fills up the narrower parts of swallow holes , disabling them to swallow all the incoming water and other load . 
During the raining period , the karst polje between Koritnice , Bač and Knežak is in its lowest parts regularly inundated , while during extremely high waters extensive flooding of short duration occurs , causing flood damage (Kovačič 2005) . 
A slightly different explanation of morphogenesis in the Pleistocene is offered by Radinja (1972) , who argues that climate changes caused the selective lowering of different types of rock , which changed hypsographic relations between them and led to the creation of gradient and deep karst circulation , which , due to the bandage of impermeable rocks around carbonates , had not been able to develop during the previous period . 
Therefore , corrosion dynamics transformed from Pliocene surface and planation corrosion into deep (point-like) karstification , as aggressive water , with the climate being colder and the vegetation and soil coverage poorer , lost its power of dissolving not until much further on its path . 
According to Radinja (1972) , the predominant morphogenetic processes are point-like karstification and erosion , the effects of the latter being more pronounced on the surface of the discussed area . 
4 . 1 Effects of Pleistocene geomorphogenesis on the present relief structure
Pleistocene geomorphic processes have left many traces in the discussed area . 
In the area above Koritnice , well noticeable traces of very intensive erosional activity of the Pivka , which sprang under the peaks Devin and Velika Milanja , are present . 
At the exit from the mountain valley , the river accumulated a huge alluvial fan , composed of rubble and gravel-like debris . 
The fan is inclined from Koritnice (625 m asl) towards Bač (580 m asl) and Knežak (580 m asl) . 
The material was transported from the nearby slopes , where strong mechanical weathering and solifluction took place in periglacial conditions . 
By its structure , the debris is more similar to rubble than it is to gravel , which proves that it was transported only for a short period and on a short distance . 
In order to make farming easier , local farmers arranged some terraces on the more inclined slopes of the alluvial fan near Koritnice . 
The highest situated springs of the former Pivka river are those in the žlebovi area (950 m asl) , situated directly at the foot of the Volovja reber ridge . 
On a very steep slope with an inclination of more than 22° , torrents created several deep and steep gullies . 
At žlebovi , gullies are abundant and they are generally orientated towards the northwest , with the exception of the gullies under Velika Milanja . 
In their upper part , they are orientated towards the north , but as soon as they reach the lower parts of the valley they turn towards the northwest . žlebovi is the left and upper source branch of the Pleistocene Pivka river . 
From the right , the other branch of the Pivka runs in a 1 km long channel . 
The spring of this branch lies at an elevation of 740 m . 
Here , the Pivka created a 10 m high pocket valley , which is separated from the surrounding surface . 
Above the ending wall of this pocket valley , there are several gullies , which are most noticeable under Devin , where , according to our assumptions , there were the highest positioned springs of the right branch of the Pleistocene Pivka . 
Under Devin , the surface is not as strongly dissected as it is in the žlebovi area . 
In the Pleistocene , torrents under Devin most probably also sprang at an elevation of 950 m . 
At the convergence of both branches , approximately 1 km before the hill Strma reber (822 m asl) , the channel of the Pleistocene Pivka becomes somewhat wider . 
Since the gradient decreases , some accumulation of unconsolidated rubble-like material mixed with soil can be observed in the area . 
In the Holocene , running water formed some very small and narrow , 0 . 5 m deep channels in these deposits . 
The latter are probably a result of one of the last phases of Pleistocene accumulation . 
Where these sediments are not denuded , their depth can exceed several metres . 
At the foothill of Strma reber , the channel of the former Pivka river is 1 . 5 m deep and more than 3 m wide . 
It is developed in unconsolidated material . 
An interesting shape of the Pivka riverbed can be observed shortly ahead of Koritnice . 
In this 350 m long section of its path , the Pivka river incised a narrow , 4 m deep channel (chut) , which has given the name to the nearby settlement of Koritnice (»korito« = »chut«) . 
Further from Koritnice towards the northwest , the Pivka riverbed gradually becomes shallower and , only after a few hundred metres , disappears . 
The position of fossil riverbeds indicates that the Pivka has changed its course several times . 
Dry riverbeds can be observed along the road leading from Koritnice to Bač and Knežak . 
Especially well developed is a dry riverbed at the foothill of Tuščak (786 m asl) on the right side of the Koritnice–Bač road (Figure 4) , where some interesting meanders can be observed . 
Its bottom is 2 m deeper than the surface of the alluvial fan above it . 
This confirms the assumption that the majority of accumulation ended in the Pleistocene and that in the Holocene some weak incision activity took place . 
During the extreme precipitation events of November 2000 , the abovementioned dry riverbed was filled up with water in its lower part and a surface stream appeared , which flooded the settlement Bač (Kovačič 2005) . 
The Pleistocene Pivka was , measured from the springs at žlebovi to the dry riverbeds under Tuščak , more than 4 km long . 
On this relatively short course , its gradient was relatively steep . 
A steeper gradient means more erosional power as well as easier and faster transportation of the mechanically weathered and disintegrated material , which formed an alluvial fan at Koritnice . 
The thickness of the accumulated material , which in spots exceeds 10 m , is therefore not surprising . 
The structure of the material can be examined on several spots in the abovementioned dry riverbed below Tuščak and in some of the excavations alongside the Koritnice–Bač road . 
In this dry riverbed , the 2 m deep profile is composed of material of different sizes . 
In the uppermost part of the profile , there is a 20 cm thick layer of dark soil mixed with gravel . 
The size of individual fragments differs , however , those with a diameter of 1–6 cm prevail , and some of them reach the size of 25 cm . 
The material is not well rounded and resembles more rubble than gravel . 
There is also some sand in it . 
With the exception of the upper part of the profile , where some thin layers of sorted material can be observed , the fragments are usually irregularly spread in the mixture of fragments of different sizes , which proves the torrent character of the Pleistocene Pivka river . 
In the excavation alongside the Koritnice–Bač road (Figure 5) , situated about 700 m away from the first profile , the conditions are similar . 
Here , the size of individual fragments is slightly smaller; fragments with a diameter of less than 2 cm prevail . 
The biggest fragments do not exceed 16 cm in diameter . 
Also here , there is a lot of sand mixed among the fragments . 
A slightly more rounded are the smaller fragments . 
The material is irregularly spread in the profile and there is no trace of stratification . 
At the bottom of this 2 . 5 m deep profile , the onetime surface of the karst polje is exposed to the surface , which is reflected in subcutaneous rocky relief features and the presence of red clay inside the pockets . 
Traces of Pleistocene activity can also be found in a hanging valley on the southern side of the Volovja reber ridge . 
At the end of the valley , on a flat area (Kamenščina) above the depression of Šembijsko jezero , material of different sizes is deposited . 
The material was accumulated by a Pleistocene stream , as well as by solifluction processes , which transported the weathered material from the slopes to the lower parts of the valley . 
Compared with the material in the karst polje between Koritnice , Bač and Knežak , the fragments at Kamenščina are much smaller . 
The material structure can be studied on the basis of excavations in three dolines . 
In the examined profile (Figure 7) , layers of various materials can be seen in one of the excavated dolines . 
Beneath a 25 cm thick layer of dark soil there is a 0 . 5 m thick layer of unconsolidated and irregularly spread rubble mixed with soil . 
Individual fragments in this layer do not exceed 2 cm in diameter . 
Beneath this layer , there is a 0 . 9 m thick layer of brown clay containing some isolated larger pieces of rubble , followed by a 0 . 8 m thick layer of well-calcified , fine-grained rubble , which is lithified into the breccia . 
In the breccia , some stratification of fragments of different sizes can be observed . 
Beneath the breccia layer , there is a layer of unconsolidated fine-grained rubble , which is stratified in thin layers . 
The thickness of this layer cannot be established , however , it is estimated that this figure is higher than 0 . 8 m . 
In the examined 4 m deep profile , the size of individual fragments in the breccia as well as in the layer of rubble beneath it does not exceed 5 cm in diameter , which indicates small transport capacity of surface flow in the valley in the past . 
The shape of the fragments indicates that the origin of the material is in the nearest hinterland . 
The rocky bottom of the doline is not noticeable , and there are no fragments of dripstone found in the material . 
The sediments in the other two excavations have a similar structure , however rocky basement is well noticeable at the bottom and margins of these two dolines filled up with earth and other material . 
In the middle part of the valley , there is a small dry channel , 200 m long , which was created as a result of the erosion activity of a small surface stream , which was fed with water from melting snow below the Volovja reber ridge . 
The stream probably flowed onwards across the edge of the valley into the depression of Šembijsko jezero , where a small channel incised into the rock above it can be observed . 
The channel carried surface waters and fine-grained material to the bottom of the present depression of Šembijsko jezero and to a hollow depression called Nariče , which was also flooded during the extreme precipitation events of November 2000 . 
A similar , but somewhat longer channel runs from the northwesternmost slopes of the Volovja reber ridge and is initially orientated towards the northwest . 
Afterwards , it turns to the west and ends at Nariče . 
The channel is very narrow and shallow and has a rocky bottom . 
5 Conclusion
The study of present relief features in the discussed area has revealed that the fluvial relief features have been heavily transformed by the recent lowering of the surface due to the corrosion of precipitation water . 
Nevertheless , some elements of the erosional activity of surface running waters from previous periods in the hinterland of today ' s Pivka river karst spring are still well preserved . 
Moreover , these elements are the most recognizable ones in the discussed area . 
The basic features of karst relief in the hinterland of the present Pivka river were developed in the period of warm and humid Pliocene climate . 
The previously developed karst features were altered by Pleistocene processes . 
Due to increasing mechanical weathering of limestone , gradual slopes were formed and the surface became well dissected . 
While the hanging valley on the southern side of the Volovja reber ridge was largely transformed by more recent karstification processes , the elements of fluvial relief are still predominant in the dry valley of the former Pivka river . 
This is evidence of the great erosional power of Pleistocene running waters , causing more intense deepening of this tectonically crushed area compared with the surrounding areas . 
Thus , most of the effects of Pleistocene morphogenetic activity are still noticeable and are prevailing on the surface . 
Therefore , several small dry gullies and trough-shaped stream channels are still preserved . 
Rubble and gravel-like clastic debris , which had been transported by Pleistocene running waters from the foothills of Devin and Velika Milanja , thickly covered the depression of the karst polje between Koritnice , Bač and Knežak . 
It can be concluded from the structure of deposits and the presence of dry riverbeds that the majority of accumulation ended in the Pleistocene , while in the Holocene some weak incision activity took place . 
Except in the area of the abovementioned karst polje , deposits from the Pleistocene period and some of later origin can also be found in other depressions . 
Today , dispersed point-orientated corrosion is a prevailing geomorphic process in the discussed region . 
In the upper parts of the Volovja reber ridge and in the žlebovi area , the mechanical weathering of rocks is also strong , especially in the colder part of the year . 
Relief evolution in the region is , to a great extent , conditioned by the groundwater level . 
The water table in the karst polje between Koritnice , Bač and Knežak is usually 30–40 m below the surface and is inclined from Koritnice , where it reaches 560 m asl , towards Bač , where it reaches 540 m asl (Krivic et al . 
1983) . 
Hydrologically , the area under review is a bifurcation zone between the Adriatic and Black Seas . 
Groundwater flows away from the karst polje mainly towards the Pivka spring , whereas the depression of Šembijsko jezero and its catchment area belong to the Reka river basin , as the water table is inclined towards the Podstenjšek karst spring . 
If we integrate the geomorphogenetic evolution of the discussed area into the broader context of relief evolution in the entire Pivka basin or at least in its upper part (Upper Pivka) , the question of further gemorphogenetic development of this very interesting region arises . 
In their study of intermittent lakes in the Pivka basin as well as in their comparison between hydrological conditions in Upper Pivka and those in the Cerknica karst polje , Ravbar and Šebela (2004) establish that the Pivka basin is currently in the preliminary development phase of a »typical« karst polje , where karst depressions deepen to the level of karst groundwater , as is the case with the intermittent lakes of Upper Pivka . 
However , another explanation is possible . 
According to the results of hydrogeological investigations , the groundwater gradient in the Javorniki area is orientated towards the Malni karst springs (Habič 1968) . 
Strong , deep groundwater circulation towards the northeast is present , which has been proved by tracer experiments (Habič 1989) . 
Considering these facts , we can assume that the deepening of karst depressions has not been interrupted and is still in progress . 
Today , the relief of the Pivka basin , with its many periodically inundated karst depressions and the unstable course of the Pivka river , can be characterized as a dissected karst polje . 
As an interesting detail , I would like to mention the structure of the karst depression of the lake Malo Drskovško jezero , which is reminiscent of a classical overflow karst polje , with the spring on one side and the ponor on the other . 
The Pivka basin (Pivka , the Pivka karst polje) (Kranjc 1987) is one of the most spectacular and most interesting regions of the Slovenian classical karst . 
This article , based on critical review of literature and fieldwork , sets out to explain relief evolution in the southeasternmost part of the basin . 
The region has gone through different geomorphogenetic phases , with many different processes interchanging with one another . 
Today , the relief structure is predominantly characterized by the effects of Pleistocene processes . 
