Karst aquifer hazard assessment and mapping on the Classical Karst
ABSTRACT: The article presents potential and actual sources of groundwater contamination on the Kras plateau, which is the recharge area of the Klariči karst water source that provides drinking water for the Kras plateau and Koprsko primorje.
The water source is insufficiently protected due to inadequate water protection policy and the control over the implementation of the provisions has often been ineffective.
Untreated wastewaters, illegal waste-disposal dumps and traffic endanger the water source.
The hazards are shown on a simplified map that could be, in a suitable scale, a valuable practical tool for further water source protection and in land-use planning.
KEY WORDS: karst hydrology, karst aquifers, karst groundwater, contamination, hazard assessment and mapping, protection, drinking water, Kras.
1 Introduction
Karst aquifers are particularly susceptible to contamination, because of very thin or absent soil, vegetation and/or sediments enabling a rapid flow of the infiltrating water and its distribution over large distances in heterogeneous flow conditions (Ford and Williams 1989, 127–140).
For these specific characteristics the overlying layers and concentration of flow enable easy and rapid pathway to the saturated zone.
Since there is little opportunity for attenuation of contaminant until it reaches groundwater, spring or well, some serious contamination problems may result from different human impacts.
Karst aquifers are very important for regional and local drinking water supply both in Slovenia and in many other countries of the world.
Therefore, human impacts and its effects on karst groundwater studies are becoming more and more important for the proper groundwater protection.
The protection of the karst groundwater requires sustainable management, which should be based on comprehensive hazard analyses and karst groundwater vulnerability maps.
In the context of groundwater contamination, hazard is defined as an existing and potential source of contamination resulting from human activities taking place mainly at the land surface (De Ketelaere et al.
2004, 86).
Hazard assessment and mapping provide a useful conceptual framework within which human activities may be evaluated in holistic terms (Drew and Hötzl 1999, 275).
In order to protect increasingly valuable groundwater resources the concept of hazard mapping is coming to the fore (špes et al.
2002, 21).
For this reason the intensity, extent and duration of an imposed stress need to be quantified.
On these basis potential and actual sources of pollution to the groundwater evaluation and maps can be elaborated.
The present article is a study and a review of potential and actual sources of groundwater contamination on the Kras plateau which is the recharge area of a Klariči karst water source near Brestovica, which is close to Kostanjevica na Krasu.
Water source provide drinking water for the Kras plateau and the Koprsko primorje region as well (Ravbar 2004, 79–81).
Many useful and valuable data were compiled from existing databases and gathered by previous investigations (Kovačič and Ravbar 2005, 226).
During the systematic examinations of the studied area in years 2003 and 2004 all potential and actual hazards to groundwater on the Kras plateau were recorded and mapped.
In spite of relatively precise survey of the area it is possible that some of the hazards remained unrecorded.
Hazard classification is based on type of human activities.
A hazard assessment considers the descriptive information of the existent and potential degree of harmfulness.
The most serious potential and actual hazards of groundwater are briefly described below as well as shown on a map.
All the mapped hazards were analysed by computer using GIS (ArcView GIS Version 3.1).
2 Some natural characteristics of the Kras plateau
The Karst plateau aquifer belongs to the Low Dinaric karst.
It lies in the southwestern Slovenia and covers about 440 km2.
It reaches heights from 200 to 600 metres above the sea level and extends in the northwest-southeast direction.
It primarily consists of limestone and dolomite of the Cretaceous and Paleocene age (Kranjc et al.
1999, 25).
Along the Vipava valley in the north, the carbonate rock of the Cretaceous age changes into less permeable layers of Tertiary sandstone, plate limestone and flysch, and through Paleocene limestone into Eocene flysch in the south and southwest (Buser 1973; Jurkovšek et al.
1996).
There is no permanent surface water on the Kras plateau.
This aquifer is fed by the precipitation and by the sinking rivers at its border: the Reka river, the Sajevški potok stream, the Senožeški potok stream and the streams from the Brkini hills (Krivic et al.
1989).
In the northwest the aquifer is also fed by underground infiltration of the intergranular aquifer of the Vipava and Soča rivers (Figure 1).
The Kras aquifer empties in numerous small superficial and submarine karst springs on the western and north-western edge.
We can deduce that the groundwater level is inclined from southeast to northwest and from east to west (Habič 1984, 62).
According to the Cadastre of Caves (2003), 626 caves, among which shafts prevail, were registered in the studied area.
The density of their entrances is among the highest in Slovenia.
It reaches from 1.5 up to 2.4 entrances per km2.
In spite of very high density the majority of underground water channels is not accessible.
One can only reach permanent or periodical water flow in seven caves.
Therefore information on underground water circulation is very limited.
The aquifer of the Kras plateau is an important source of drinking water; the advantages of its capacities are not yet fully taken (Krivic 1983).
Water supply is based on the effective karst groundwater pumping near Klariči, providing a yearly yield of about two millions m3 of water and supplying more than 22,500 people (Ravbar 2004, 79–81).
The water source is sufficient enough to supply the Koprsko primorje region during the summer tourist season as well.
3 Description of hazards
3.1 Settlements
The most frequent sources of pollution of karst groundwater result from household sewages, polluted waters from roads and traffic, industrial polluted wastewaters and illegal dumps.
Potential polluters are also oil reservoirs that have been built unprofessionally and without control.
The Kras plateau is relatively disperse and scarcely inhabited (Figure 2) – the density of population is 44 inhabitants per km2 (Internet 4).
From 1961 to 1991 the growth of inhabitants has been very modest, only 9,5% (Perko and Orožen Adamič 1998, 234).
There are clumpy little villages with up to 200 inhabitants and five settlements (Sežana, Divača, Dutovlje, Komen and Lokev) with more than 500 inhabitants.
Urban way of life predominates in municipal centers.
The largest settlement is Sežana (4800 inhabitants), which is also the industrial, administrative and cultural centre of Kras.
Divača (1300 inhabitants) is an important railway junction.
Sewage systems in the settlements of the studied area are very limited.
All settlements on the plateau except Sežana, Divača and Senožeče still do not have regulated sewerage and treatment of sewage.
In the town of Sežana only 55% of waste and of public utility water is drawn off purifying plant.
About 440 cesspits are still in use.
Additionally in town of Senožeče 70% of waste and of public utility waters is drawn off purifying plant, while in Divača only 35%.
Wastewater from households in other settlements is drawn off to cesspits and there is only a small portion of such that have impermeable bottoms.
3.2 Waste material disposal
One of the biggest polluters of karst groundwater on the Kras plateau is landfill of waste materials near Sežana.
It is intended for disposal of waste materials from households and of special waste materials from industry, and of craft and other activities under conditions, which are paraphrased by the Rules on the management of waste (Ur. l.
SRS št.
20/86).
The landfill of waste materials in Sežana has legally regulated status, but it does not entirely meet the demands of the new Slovene legislation (Internet 1) and European guidelines (Council Directive 1999/31/EC).
Analyses of discharge waters from the Sežana dump have shown high organic pollution.
COD and BOD5 have exceeded the limit value for several times.
Evaluations of the tracing tests have shown, that discharge waters from the Sežana dump can reach sources of the Timavo river within three to twelve days (Kogovšek 1996, 113).
The existing dump is already old and urgently needs rebuilding and widening.
An enlargement of the dump place to the west and to the northwest for additional 5 ha is foreseen.
Numerous illegal garbage dumps on the karst terrain may also influence the quality of groundwater by bacterial and chemical load.
On the Kras plateau landfills of local origin are the most frequent.
In 2003 there have been 59 illegal dumps registered on the surface of the studied area and another 55 of them in the caves (Figure 3).
Illegal garbage dumps derive from times when collection of waste was not organized.
Many of them are, unfortunately, still in use today.
Among waste material building and excavation material, rural and furniture waste material prevail.
There are also dangerous materials (refrigerators, motor vehicles, accumulators, battery, varnishes and motor oils, packaging of cleaning means, remainders of agrochemical means, dismissed chemical and computer equipment).
On such dumps one can often find old ironware, isolative material, pneumatic tires, waste from gardens or fields and other.
In spite of restrictions and interdiction of definite activities on the protected area we found that in the second water protection zone of the Klariči water source there is an abandoned illegal dump of building material.
In the third water protection zone, where spreading of certain activities is strictly forbidden we identified twelve more illegal dumps that mostly consisted of rural, building and also of dangerous waste materials.
In two additional cases we recorded dumps in a direct vicinity of a stream that on the border area of the studied area sinks into the underground.
Among the known caves more than eight percent of them are polluted.
There are mainly waste of public utility origin, dead animal bodies and slaughter waste material, furniture and military ammunition.
Analyses of discharged waters in selected caves that have been done by the Sežana speleologists (Sanacija onesnaženih jam 1998) have shown too high values of insoluble and sedimented substances, COD and BOD5 (Ur. l.
RS št.
35/96).
Concentrations of noxious matter, heavy metals and mineral oils, which were washed directly into the aquifer, were extremely high.
It is also necessary to emphasize, that these caves are inside the water protection zones of the Klariči water source or in the vicinity of a supposed underground water flow of the Reka river.
Therefore contamination of this type of point pollution is by no means negligible.
3.3 Traffic
The Kras plateau lies on the crossroads of important routes, which connect Northern Adriatic Sea with Panonian basin respectively linking the Mediterranean and Central Europe.
On the Kras plateau traffic has a traditional meaning and plays an important role in economy of this area.
The most burdened are highway sections, which mostly have transit role and traverse southern part of the studied area.
Average daily traffic on highways reached 12,812 vehicles in 2001.
An average of 15,000 vehicles daily was measured on the most traffic section Razdrto–Senožeče, which also represents a bottleneck before the northern part leading towards Trieste splits the southern one that leads towards Koper (Promet 2001; 2002).
Average part of freight traffic through highways and regional roads is 13% (Figure 4).
Only the highway sections and the main road in Sežana have regulated roadside channels, where meteoric waters are collected and drained off.
Dirt is washed directly underground from the other roadways.
Therefore transport of dangerous material signifies a special danger in freight traffic.
Accidents could cause uncontrolled leakage into environment.
Another potential sources of karst groundwater burdening are petrol services.
In 2003 there were eight gasoline services operating on the Kras plateau.
All, except two of them, have been improperly built and did not have regulated drainage of wastewater through oil filters.
Due to mild climate salting of roads on the plateau is not intensive, but yet has a certain effect on the karst groundwater.
For strewing usually sodium's chloride with additions and calcium's dichloride solution is used.
Often also heavy metal or mercury is added.
Annual amount of salt that is spent for strewing of state and local roads on the Kras plateau amounts to around 740 tons.
Important contamination of groundwater because of salting has not been yet discovered.
Over the studied area around 70 kilometres of railway tracks run.
In 2002 altogether 28,105 passenger trains drove.
That is 40 percent of all transports across the Kras plateau (Internet 3).
Slovenian Railways estimate, that over nine millions tons of goods have been carried over border crossings Fernetiči and Vrtojba and Port of Koper in 2002.
Six percent were chemical products and nine percent petroleum and derivatives.
The most dangerous materials have been carried over the section Ljubljana–Koper that crosses Kras.
Although transport of dangerous material by railway is safer than transport by road, the biggest part of transportation is still based on road transport.
3.4 Agriculture
Natural circumstances of the Kras plateau are not the most convenient for agriculture.
In spite of traditional economic activity based upon wild pear breeding and agronomy, region represented supplying hinterland of Trieste.
Agriculture is no longer an important activity and is restricted to cultivation of small fields on the bottom of depressions on the plateau.
But viticulture is coming to the fore and is becoming the most profitable rural activity recently.
Vineyards cover only three percent of land, mostly in the vicinity of Dutovlje, Tomaj, Križ, Avber, Komen, Kobdilj and Utovlje.
In the municipalities of Komen and Sežana area of vineyards commonly exceeds 450 ha.
In the vicinity of Tomaj and Dutovlje the production of fruit is enforced as well (Internet 2, Vrišer 2002).
Intensely cultivated vineyards and orchards, where a lot of fertilizers and protective means are used, are the areas most exposed to suspended pollution.
Because in intensive viticulture the quantity and quality of the crops depend completely on use of the phyto-pharmaceutical products, for achieving bigger yields winegrowers usually use too much of these preparations (Rejec Brancelj 2001).
On the Kras plateau constant sources of pollution are also disorderly-manured dung heaps, cesspits and stocks of stable manure, from where discharge waters drain directly underground.
Diffuse sources of pollution are immoderate fertilizing of fodder plants, above all with mineral fertilizers, use of other agrochemical means for protection of plants and uncontrolled fertilizing with manure during the wrong time of the year.
Stockbreeding in the studied area is negligible.
There are no bigger cattle or pork farms.
However, cooperative breeders of poultry prevail.
They breed 20,000–80,000 animals per year.
Settlements exceeding 0,5 LU/ha (livestock units per hectare) are very rare: Volčji grad, Lipa, Vojščica, Brestovica pri Povirju, Kazlje, Opatje selo, Lokev and Utovlje.
Settlements that exceed 0,8 LU/ha are Voglje, štorje and Sveto (Internet 4).
The stud farm and tourist recreational centre Lipica is the biggest supposed polluter of the karst groundwater.
It contaminates groundwater with disorderly discharges of dirty water from the stables and with sewage.
It consumes 70,500 m3 of water yearly.
Wastewaters are drawn off to obsolete and too small water treatment plant with mechanical treatment, and then directly into environment.
The analyses of the outflow (Poročilo o obratovalnem monitoringu odpadnih voda 2002) showed that this source of pollution immoderately contaminates the environment.
Measured values of COD, BOD5, total phosphorus, suspended solids, nitrites and total tenzides surpassed the maximum permissible values (Ur. l.
RS 35/96).
3.5 Industry
Industrial development started only after the Second World War, especially in Sežana, Divača and Komen.
But only few factories have survived economical recession in the 1990s.
Therefore industrial pollution, which has achieved the highest point in the eighties, is considerably reduced.
Improvement of sanitary conditions that numerous factories have accepted also helped to the reduction of the environmental pollution by industrial sewages.
Today the industrial production on the Kras plateau is limited and concentrated above all in bigger urban areas.
Most important industrial city is Sežana, where food, textile, chemical and construction industry and continental terminal are located.
In Divača there are a factory of electric machines and some other smaller industrial plants.
In Komen there is a construction industry, in Dutovlje wood industry and in šepulje a meat processing industry.
Industrial effluents are also a source of groundwater contamination if wastewater collection and drainage systems are not built or are not efficient.
Concerning industries the biggest pollutant of karst groundwater is the ham-curing plant Kras at Šepulje, one of the leading meat processing industries in Slovenia.
Annual amount of consumed water reaches 46,570 m3.
Since they do not have their own water treatment plant built they draw off the technical waters and sewage directly into the nature.
The analyses of discharge waters have shown, that they contain too big toxicity for water fleas and too high values of oil and grease, total phosphorus, chloride, COD and BOD5 (Poročilo o vzorčenju odpadne vode in terenskih meritvah 2001).
Mitol, the glue factory in Sežana, is a very big consumer of water and producer of technological sewage on the Kras plateau.
Annually they spend 17,300 m3 of water for raw material, cooling and elution of receptacles and other equipment.
They have their own wastewater treatment plant and regulated wastewater treatment.
Their technological sewage is at first drawn off their own water treatment plant and then to the public water treatment plant, where they do not exceed stipulated values (Poročilo o vzorčenju odpadne vode in terenskih meritvah 2002).
But at the same time it is also one of the biggest potential polluters of karst groundwater because of possibility of pouring out of chemical substances.
They store 250–300 t of dangerous material, which is kept in entrenched reservoirs.
3.6 Tourism
Tourist potential of the Kras plateau is extraordinarily high.
However, its offer and service is still very moderate.
The area has big possibilities for development of different ways of tourism, because it lies in the hinterland of important coastal towns (Koper, Trieste, Monfalcone).
Arrangement of dispersed tourist centers would be reasonable in order to make drinking water sources of the Kras plateau exposed to human impacts due to tourism as small as possible.
For that it would be necessary to consider carefully, what degree of tourist visit the plateau can accept in sense of increased consumption of drinking water and the consequent enlarged amounts of wastewaters, big hotel and other accommodation constructions, parking facilities and increased traffic.
4 Conclusion
The response of the karst environment and its constituents on the anthropogenic pollution is very specific and characteristically differs from other environments.
Transport of the contaminants through the unsaturated zone, where substances can retain underground from few minutes to several years, is very complex.
Unpredictable is also traveling of the contaminants through the saturated zone, because the conditions of the main karst channels are usually unknown (Ford and Williams 1989, 518–521).
Therefore we can very hardly forecast the consequences of different anthropogenic activities to the karst environment.
However, direct outflow of the discharge waters into the karst aquifer without preliminary cleaning could slowly but persistently poison stock of drinking water.
In case of outflow of dangerous substances karst water resource could be permanently poisoned as an example of the Krupa spring in the Bela Krajina region, SE Slovenia (Polič et al.
1999).
For this reasons it is necessary to devote our attention to the influences of human impacts on behaviour of karst waters and to prevent or reduce these negative impacts.
Hazard and vulnerability maps are essential tools for national and local entities with relevant responsibilities at the planning and decision making level.
Even though methodology for making these maps in Slovenia is not enacted yet some studies at different areas have already been made (Janža and Prestor 2002; Petrič 2002).
Present study shows that diverse types of hazards, coming from different human activities, threaten the groundwater of the Kras plateau.
A hazard assessment and mapping of the Kras plateau considers the existent and potential degree of harmfulness for each type of hazard.
Prevailing source of pollution of karst groundwater comes from settlements without wastewater treatment.
Several domestic houses have built-in cesspits, which are not properly constructed.
Settlements contaminate groundwater mainly because of untreated faecal and domestic wastewaters, a growing consumption of chemical cleaning agents and detergents as well.
In the vicinity of many of the settlements illegal waste-disposal dumps appear.
They may influence the quality of groundwater by bacterial and chemical load.
Traffic that is crossing the recharge area is a serious potential source of accidental contamination.
Sources of contamination are also industrial effluents, specially in the cases, where wastewater collection and drainage systems are not built.
An example is the ham-curing plant.
Agriculture and farming are not intensive on the Kras plateau, therefore they do not significantly affect the quality of the karst groundwater, except in the case of viticulture, where the influence of the extensive usage of fertilizers and protective means on the quality of karst groundwater is not negligible (Figure 5).
The conditions for groundwater protection are not very favourable on the Kras plateau that is relatively densely inhabited (in comparison to High Dinaric Karst and Alpine Karst) and threatened by diverse types of hazards.
Additional reasons are inadequate consideration of special characteristics of water flow in karst and very high karst water sources vulnerability, disorder in water protection, conflicting interests in land use and the lack of knowledge about sustainable water management.
Since monitoring points of groundwater pollution are very scarce in karst hydrological systems due to their heterogeneity, the detection of actual hazards is very difficult.
So chemical and bacteriological analyses performed at springs and wells are another possibility of detecting eventual contamination.
Although extensive exploration of karst aquifers has often been avoided until now, some signs of contamination have already been recorded in several karst springs in Slovenia (Kovačič and Ravbar 2005, 232).
Negative impacts to karst groundwater on the Kras plateau are shown in the drinking water analyses, such as increased presence of coliform bacteria and bacteria Escherichia coli.
These bacteria are indicators of fresh contamination with fecal wastewater.
However, the concentrations did not exceed the maximum permis sible values for drinking water.
In order to preserve quality quantities of karst groundwater for exploitation in the future, it is necessary to establish an adequate protection.
Adequate elaborated vulnerability map of karst water sources based on actual and potential mapping are essential.
Therefore hazard mapping is a valuable practical tool for further water sources protection and land-use planning.
