Ivan Gams – karstologist
ABSTRACT: Academician Ivan Gams is Slovenia's best known researcher of karst and the most prolific author of works on karst.
During his first job at the Institute of Geography of the Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts, he started researching the karst surface and underground.
He published several in-depth publications on karst caves, the most well-known being the studies of the shaft Triglavsko brezno in the 1960's.
Right from the beginning, he focused on issues to which he then dedicated more or less his whole life – and which were also widely recognized by professional public both at home and abroad –, namely corrosion intensity determined by the hardness of water and the discharges of karst rivers and springs, and the method of limestone tablets.
Within the geomorphology of karst, Gams was mostly dealing with the karst polje, especially its definition and evolution.
KEY WORDS: karstology, corrosion, karst geomorphology, speleology, limestone tablets, karst polje, Ivan Gams
1 Introduction
Without doubt, professor Gams is one of the most well-known Slovenian researchers of karst both on the national and international level, as well as our most prolific author of scientific, professional and popular articles on karst, physical geography (Komac and Zorn 2013), regional geography (Perko 2013), and many other geographica branches (Kladnik 2013).
As a geographer, he was focused mostly on physical geography but was interested in other branches of geography as well, particularly in the distinct landscape of Slovenia – karst.
However, he was not or did not remain only a researcher of the regional geography of karst but instead set himself to examine karst from the theoretical point of view and became a karstologist in the widest sense of the word.
Unfortunately neither his expert publications nor his personal records do not indicate where, how and why he became interested in karst – had he been attracted to karst already during his school years or did it become his professional focus, his expert »niche« later when he evolved as a talented young geographer.
2 Ivan Gams and karstology
After having graduated in 1951, he got his first job at the Institute of Geography of the Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts and wrote his first articles on karst, i.e. four reviews of Yugoslavian books dealing with karst.
During his employment at the Institute of Geography, he published about 50 articles on karst, half of them dealing with the karst underground and the other half focused on its surface or karst as a whole.
This research indicated the beginning of Gams's research of karst processes on the surface and underground, and particularly its basic factor, i.e. corrosion.
Since examinations of the karst underground require certain rather demanding technical skills, Gams decided to join the Cave Exploration Society (DZRJ).
Soon, he became a skilled and experienced caver, proved by his research of shaft Pugljevo brezno – which was at the time the deepest shaft in the Slovenian region of Dolenjska (1959) –, cave Dvatisoča jama (1960), shaft Brezno pod Grudnom (1961) and the initial observations of shaft Triglavsko brezno (1957).
In 1956, cavers from Ljubljana reenabled the cave laboratory in Podpeška jama where Gams first applied his »tablet test« and thus initiated the Slovenian research of the erosion-corrosion relation in karst areas.
Over the years, the test was upgraded into the »tablet method« that is now being used all over the world.
This period was also largely marked by the first explorations of karst morphology, especially on karst poljes as indicated in the comprehensive study of karst polje Globodol (Gams 1959).
Gams became a member of the DZRJ’s committee as early as in 1951 and was thus the first committee member of the younger generation, the only one who had not joined it before the 2nd World War.
One of the biographical accounts on Ivan Gams (Anon 1998) states briefly: "… because he was engaged in the studies of karst as well, he started working at the Karst Research Institute of the Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts in Postojna in 1962 and remained there until 1966.
His enthusiasm and growing expertise in speleology can be seen from the fact that in 1962, he became the president of the revived caving organisation, the Cave Exploration Society of Slovenia, which was of federal nature (and was later renamed to Speleological Association of Slovenia), and focused his efforts on reorganising and strengthening the society.
That period was definitely his most active as far as his involvement in speleology is concerned, both from the organisational and research point of view.
His important contribution to the successful organisation of the 4th International Congress of Speleology should be mentioned here as well.
He was a member of the organising committee, a member of the secretariat and the chairman of the programming committee.
In fact, it was on Gams's initiative that the International Union of Speleology was founded during this congress.
In addition, he became a member (and from 1977 the chairman) of the Union's committee on karst denudation.
On a more personal note – it was during my membership in this committee under Gams's chairmanship that my own professional career started developing towards speleology and karstology.
On of Gams's biggest speleological achievements was the expedition to shaft Triglavsko brezno in 1962, the so-called »Action Bottom« which was the biggest caving action so far in Slovenia as far as the number of participants, the amount of equipment and the extent of radio and newspaper coverage are concerned.
During his five-year position at the Karst Research Institute in Postojna, Gams published about 40 substantial articles, assessments and reports – discussions excluded –, including 18 original scientific articles.
Although these articles were published in professional journals, many of them were thorough and comprehensive enough to be labelled as monographs.
Namely, five of them have more than 50 pages, whereas the articles on cave Logarček and corrosion factors have as many as 77 and 57 pages respectively – both were published in Acta carsologica, the journal of the Postojna institute.
At that time, karst research had been gradually separated into several main directions that Gams was focused on his long career: karst geomorphology and hydrology, karstification processes (especially corrosion), cave exploration and karst terminology.
In 1966, Gams became an associate of the university Institute for Geography and later in the same year, he was appointed associate professor of physical geography at the Department of Geography of the Faculty of Arts, University of Ljubljana.
Already during his first year of teaching, he dedicated a large part of his geomorphological lectures to karst, whereas later on, he established a separate new course named Karst geography.
During his years at the university and afterwards, when he retired, his bibliography consisted of approximately 170 publications focusing on karst.
Why »approximately«?
Because Gams was a distinctly »complex« geographer – to use academician Ilešič's term – who adopted a broad approach towards examining the landscape and its processes, it is sometimes difficult to distinguish whether a certain publication is dealing with karst or some other topic.
One of such examples is certainly his regional of physical-geographical description of Bela krajina (Gams 1961).
His definition of more in-depth topics is similar: corrosion and flowstone deposition are opposite but nevertheless mutually connected phenomena – rock dissolution above the cave and deposition of flowstone in the cave.
Grooves are surface (micro) forms caused by corrosion.
This is just to illustrate Gams's broad view of geography, physical geography and karstology.
His last article on the development of subcutaneous karst in the region of Bela krajina was published in 2011 in Acta carsologica, the same journal that – years earlier – published one of his first substantial articles on karst, the study of karst spring Mitoščica (Gams 1955).
3 The main karstological publications of Ivan Gams
Gams's interest in karst and the results of his research are clearly evident from his publications which I tried to divide into several groups as indicated below.
Most of his papers (50) were focused on the geomorphology of karst, including the prevailing topic of corrosion (limestone dissolution) and the studies of karst poljes.
Karst is not only on the surface, but includes the underground as well, and Gams was determined to give the underground its equally fair share of attention.
Among almost 40 of his papers with speleological content, most were dealing with stalactites/stalagmites and flowstone, i.e. their deposition, forms, age and preservation.
Other articles focus on more specific speleological topics such as descriptions and general studies of caves – their size, form and origin.
A significant share of publications covers cave climate/microclimate.
With regards to the amount of published content, Gams's research into the hydrology of karst should be mentioned as well.
However, the mere number of publications is not always a proper criterion: in order to prepare the 50-page research paper on the hydrology of the territory between Postojna Polje, Planina Polje and Cerknica Polje (Gams 1966), a considerably higher number of observations and measurements were required and more extensive literature and referential searches had to be made than for the description of e.g. cave Dvatisoča jama, regardless of its thoroughness and importance.
He wrote only four publications on karst terminology but nevertheless, his contributions to this area are far from insignificant as I will soon explain.
As a geographer, Gams wanted to include people in his research of karst as well.
He wrote as many as 17 articles on the connection between the man and karst, their mutual influence and the consequences of human activities on the karst environment.
Although it requires some skill to identify Gams's published works on karst, it is even more difficult to evaluate them, i.e. evaluate their importance in both the national and the international scientific community, among karstologists and geographers.
Most of Gams's works on karst were published at the time when bibliometrics was not in use yet and most of the authors citing Gams's publications are from that period as well.
According to SICRIS, the Slovenian Current Research Information System, Gams's works received 52 citations between 1998 and 2013.
This of course does say something, but it says more about the fact that the currently most prolific researchers do not cite older publications, e.g. Gams's works from the 1960s or 1970s, very often.
In addition, it shows that Gams's works were cited in books, papers and journals not covered by bibliometrics which even nowadays remains the downside of this particular set of methods – as far as karstology is concerned.
The first edition of Karst Geomorphology and Hydrology by Ford and Williams, – known as the »bible of karstology« –, published in 1989, contained 11 citations of Gams's works, whereas the latest edition, published in 2007, contains 15 citations.
Thus, not only does the fundamental work on karstology contain the highest number of Gams's works among of all Slovenian and Yugoslavian karstologists, it also cites only a few authors as frequently as it does Gams.
Gams is therefore one of the most frequently cited authors on the subject of karst worldwide.
4 Conclusion
According to my own casual knowledge, information shared by lecturers on professional meetings and an unsystematic review of Gams's citations in various types of literature, his most important achievements regarding karstology can be defined as follows:
• Determination of corrosion intensity based the measurements of water hardness and the discharges of karst springs and karst rivers.
The measurements and studies that Gams performed were a novelty both in Slovenia and abroad.
This method was implemented by the French karstologist J. Corbel.
It is possible that Gams got to know it better through one of Corbel's students, the distinguished Polish karstologist
M. Puline who also visited Gams in Slovenia and stayed here for a longer period of time in order to do some studying and research.
Gams's work in this area was distinguished and met with a wide response, including a proposal put forward at one of the professional meetings saying that a project should be launched with the same goal, using the »Gams approach« or the »Gams method« (Sarinetal.
1997).
• Identification and comparison of intensity by means of limestone tablets, a method which Gams had applied to initiate his first measurements in cave Podpeška jama already in 1959 (Gams 1959a).
This method proved particularly suitable for the comparison of karstification processes in various parts of the world and in various climate zones, which stimulated karstologists from almost all over the world to start using this method and it has remained in use until today (Gams 1985; Ivanov etal.
1983; Jennings 1977).
• The third – although not by importance – is Gams's contribution to the geomorphology of karst, especially his research of karst poljes.
Though it was not widely accepted, his definition of a karst polje was definitely known all over the world (Gams 1978).
His other studies and publications dealing with karst poljes are no less significant and recognized.
However, it surprises me that his thesis on the two-phase development of karst poljes (Gams 1973), substantially supported by field research on our karst poljes, did not receive a wider recognition and is not being considered in other studies of this particular topic.
Especially since it is not only about Slovenian karst poljes but – and I can say this from my own experience – because such development is even more distinctly evident on karst poljes in Dinaric karst outside of Slovenia.
Perhaps this is because this article was published quite a while ago (1973) when literature and references still had to be retrieved »manually«, or perhaps it is because it was published in German (at the time, English was not as dominant as it is nowadays), or because the journal it was published in (Erkundliches Wissen) was not so well-known by researchers of the Dinaric karst.
However, Gams's contribution to the Slovenian karst terminology should definitely not be overlooked.
His work in this area obviously cannot be as internationally recognized as other topics he dealt with (although it is used as a reference by foreign terminologies, e.g. the most comprehensive terminology compiled by Panoš) (Panoš 2001), but on the national level, his Slovene Karst terminology (Gams 1973a) remains the basic – and more or less the only – reference of this kind.
In Serbia, the collected works of Jovan Cvijić were published in 14 volumes, Croatian celebrated the 100th anniversary of Roglić's birth by publishing his selected works, including a special edition of his work focused on karst… will we ever publish the collected works of our greatest, internationally acclaimed karstologist in Slovenia as well?
