Eogenetic caves in Pleistocene carbonate conglomerate in Slovenia
ABSTRACT: This paper focuses on caves in Pleistocene carbonate conglomerates in Slovenia and for the first time defines them as eogenetic.
The conglomerates show no deep burial that would resemble the mezogenetic stage of diagenesis and are still in the phase of early diagenesis (i.e. eogenetic stage).
Based on speleological analysis the eogenetic caves were grouped into four types; (1) linear stream caves, (2) shelter caves, (3) breakdown caves, and (4) vadose shafts.
All four types of caves, described in this paper, can appear individually, however, complex cave systems are often a combination of passages of different types.
KEY WORDS: geography, karst geomorphology, speleology, caves in conglomerate, eogenetic caves, Pleistocene, Slovenia
1 Introduction
Caves in conglomerate have already been recognised and described in Slovenia (Gantar 1955; Žlebnik 1978; Gabrovšek 2005; Kranjc 2005; Lipar and Ferk 2011) as well as worldwide (Günay 1985; Bergadá et al.
1997; Filippov 2004; Ferrarese and Sauro 2005; Zampieri et al.
2005; Lapaire et al.
2006; Goeppert et al.
2011).
However, they still remain one of the less researched features in the karst literature.
Furthermore, in Slovenia, detailed studies of caves in conglomerate have only been focused on caves in the Udin Boršt conglomerate terrace (Gantar 1955; Gabrovšek 2005; Kranjc 2005; Lipar and Ferk 2011).
Even though caves in conglomerate are often categorised as one type of caves, numerous different cave types can be identified within this group.
The genesis and morphology of caves are strongly influenced by conglomerate characteristics which makes geological predispositions important for understanding of speleogenesis in conglomerates.
In Slovenia, the cave types in Pleistocene conglomerate for example are much different when compared to cave types in Tertiary or older conglomerates.
During diagenesis, conglomerates can be modified by different processes (e.g. covered by marine sedimentation of limestones, clays) and their characteristics can become more similar to telogenetic limestones than to younger conglomerates in eogenetic stage; for example, the speleogenesis of caves in Oligocene conglomerates in Slovenia (e.g. Marijino Brezno Cave (Reg.
No. 6)) is more similar to cave formation in limestones of Mesozoic age (Kataster jam JZS 2011).
Consequently it is crucial to draw a precise line between conglomerates in different diagenetic stages.
This paper discusses the main characteristics of speleogenesis of caves in conglomerates in eogenetic geological stage of diagenesis and is therefore focused on caves in Pleistocene conglomerate.
Based on the wide range literature review and field work, this paper summarizes detailed speleological analyses of all known caves in Pleistocene conglomerate in Slovenia.
The main objectives are (1) to represent the distribution of Slovenian caves in Pleistocene conglomerate, (2) to describe their morphology and speleogenesis, and to (3) introduce general types of eogenetic caves in conglomerate.
2 Caves in conglomerate
The term »caves in conglomerate« resembles broad geological (sedimentological) point of view and refers to caves, which have formed in a coarse-grain (> 2 mm) cemented sediment, also known as calcirudite.
However, due to different age of conglomerate, its different grain mineralogy, porosity, and even metamorphosis, the variety of cave types in conglomerates is high.
The term is very broad and usually further characterization is needed to interpret caves more in detail.
Caves in eogenetic conglomerate of Miocene or Pleistocene age have been reported from Italy (Ferrarese and Sauro 2005; Zampieri et al.
2005), Turkey (Günay 1985; Değirmenci and Günay 1993) and Slovenia (Gantar 1955; Gabrovšek 2005; Kranjc 2005; Lipar and Ferk 2011).
Generally, the majority of those caves have been influenced by the matrix porosity of conglomerate, its permeability, and neotectonics.
Hence many similarities are present when comparing those caves.
On the other hand, caves of older conglomerate have been reported from Russia (Ordovician age) (Filoppov 2004; Klimchouk 2004), Switzerland (Oligocene) (Lapaire et al.
2006), Spain (Eocene, Oligocene) (Bergadá et al.
1997; Ortega 2000), China (Cretaceous) (Lynch 2003a and 2003b; Zhang 2011), Austria and Germany (Oligocene, Miocene) (Goeppert et al.
2011), and Slovenia (Oligocene) (Planina 1954 in 1955; Kataster jam JZS 2011).
Although the greater age of the rock does not necessarily exclude the eogenetic stage, many of those caves are still different from the caves in Pleistocene conglomerate due to different characteristics of the conglomerates.
Cautious and careful examination of conglomerate is needed before comparing or typifying all the caves in conglomerate together.
3 Pleistocene Conglomerates in Slovenia
Conglomerates in Slovenia were deposited through several periods of geological history (the oldest are of Devonian age) (Markič 2009; Novak and Skaberne 2009; Pavšič and Horvat 2009; Ramovš and Buser 2009; Skaberne et al.
2009).
The older conglomerates including those of Tertiary age went through different phases of diagenesis and are no longer in the eogenetic stage (i.e. are in the mezogenetic or telogenetic stage).
The younger conglomerates of Quaternary age show no deep burial that would resemble the mezogenetic stage of diagenesis.
Therefore, they are still in eogenetic stage.
In the Quaternary (Pleistocene) contrasted climatic alternations came into force with typical changes between the glacial and interglacial periods.
Pleistocene sediments in Slovenia are genetically related, at least indirectly, to the activity of glaciers that covered a large part of the Alps during their largest extent (Melik 1930; Šifrer 1952, Kuščer 1955; Šifrer 1961, Meze 1966; Šifrer 1969 and 1992; Bavec and Verbič 2004), and covered also the highest parts of the Dinaric Mountains (Snežnik, Trnovski Gozd) (Osnovna geološka karta SFRJ 1972; Bavec and Pohar 2009) while periglacial phenomena were characteristic for the Pohorje Mountains (Natek 2007; Gams 2008).
Remains of glacial sediments are mainly limited to higher mountainous regions.
The sedimentation of fluvioglacial and fluvial sediments has taken place along the river systems.
Accumulations of Pleistocene sediments are typical for the Ljubljana Basin, along the middle and lower Sava River, Soča River (Komac and Zorn 2007; Komac 2009), along the entire Savinja River, along the rivers Drava and Mura, and specifically also on karst poljes of the Dinaric Karst region (Stepišnik and Mihevc 2008; Bavec and Pohar 2009; Stepišnik et al.
2012).
Except Drava and Mura, the rivers are carrying mostly carbonate gravel.
The cement in carbonate conglomerates is mostly calcite.
The fundamental work for the subdivision of Quaternary sedimentary fill in Slovenia (based on the key study from Ljubljana Basin) was done by Kuščer (1955).
Later, Žlebnik (1971) divided the Quaternary fill into four units: the Older, Middle and Younger conglomeratic fills, and the latest gravel fill.
In carbonate conglomerates karst features have formed (e.g. caves) and according to the geological development stage of the conglomerate we can interpret them as eogenetic karst features.
4 Eogenetic caves
The term »eogenetic« was introduced by Choquette and Pray (1970) and refers to »the time interval between final deposition and burial of the newly deposited sediment or rock below the depth of significant influence by processes that either operate from the surface or depend for their effectiveness on proximity to the surface« (Choquette and Pray 1970, 219).
It overlaps with the term »early diagenesis«, defined by Berner (1980).
Associated with »eogenetic stage«, two other terms were introduced for the time of deeper burial as »mezogenetic stage«, and the time related to erosion of long-buried carbonates as »telogenetic stage« (Choquette and Pray 1970, p.
219).
The term was later used in combination with the term karst as »eogenetic karst« (Vacher and Mylroie 2002; Florea and Vacher 2006; Grimes 2006; Ginés and Ginés 2007) as well as with caves as »eogenetic caves« (Vacher and Mylroie 2002; Grimes 2006; Smart et al.
2006; Florea et al.
2007; Ginés and Ginés 2007; De Waele et al.
2009).
Generally, eogenetic caves form in soft, porous and poorly-consolidated limestones during their eogenetic stage of diagenesis (Grimes 2006), which partly limits them to the coastal regions (Vacher and Mylroie 2002; Grimes 2006; Smart et al.
2006; Ginés and Ginés 2007).
Nevertheless, they have also been described inland (Florea et al.
2007; Lipar and Ferk 2011).
Although often used for coastal caves in Quaternary limestones, the term »eogenetic caves« has only a general geological point of view and the variety of different types of caves is therefore great.
Amongst the numerous different types of eogenetic caves, summarised by Lipar and Ferk (2011), eogenetic caves in conglomerate (based on caves of Udin Boršt, Slovenia) are represented by four general types.
5 Eogenetic caves in Pleistocene conglomerate in Slovenia
According to Slovenian Cave Register there are at least 36 registered caves in Pleistocene conglomerate in Slovenia (Kataster jam IZRK 2011; Kataster jam JZS 2011) (Fig.
1).
However, the exact number is not possible to determine due to the newly found caves which are in registration process and some inaccessible and/or destroyed caves.
In Ljubljana basin, which is the only part in Slovenia with registered eogenetic caves in conglomerate, caves are mostly distributed on the edges of conglomerate terraces and river valleys.
About 40% of caves are found in the Pleistocene terrace of Udin Boršt, while the others are found mostly on terraces and canyon cliffs of the Sava and Kokra Rivers (Fig.
1).
The longest cave in Pleistocene conglomerate in Slovenia is Velika Lebinca Cave (Reg.
No. 765) which is located in Udin Boršt and has 1154 metres of measured passages.
It is followed by Arneževa Luknja Cave (Reg.
No. 763) with 815 metres of measured passages, also situated in Udin Boršt.
Excluding Udin Boršt with the largest concentration of eogenetic caves, the longest cave with 110 metres of measured passages is Jama pri Taboru Cave (Reg.
No. 367) situated near the settlement Rovte in the vicinity of Podnart.
As it was determined by Lipar and Ferk (2011) for eogenetic caves in Udin Boršt, also the caves in Pleistocene conglomerate in Slovenia could be grouped into four different types of eogenetic caves: (1) linear stream caves, (2) shelter caves, (3) breakdown caves, and (4) vadose shafts.
The majority of caves can be determined as linear stream caves (Fig.
2, 3 and 8).
They all function as permanent or ephemeral springs.
No cave of this type has been noticed to be a ponor.
Entrances are usually larger (i.e. higher than 1 m and a few metres wide; usually a shelter type entrance) than the horizontal cave passages, which become narrower upstream with distance from the entrance.
Horizontal passages primarily developed at the piezometric level.
The piezometric level changed in the past and consequently there are hydrological inactive passages in higher levels of some caves (e.g. in Arneževa Luknja Cave (Reg.
No. 763), Jama pri Taboru Cave (Reg.
No. 367)).
Furthermore, due to the water level drop, in some caves the active water flow disappeared completely and some caves of the linear stream cave type are hydrologically inactive in present hydrological conditions (e.g. Spodmol 3 pod Dragočajno (Reg.
No. 4582)).
Usually, caves consist of a horizontal passage with a main stream and short side passages as tributaries to the main water flow.
Speleogenesis of main stream passages is mostly controlled by fissure/joint porosity, described also by Bergadá et al.
(1997), Lapaire et al.
(2006) and Değirmenci and Günay (1993).
Secondarily cross-fractures triggered and influenced the development of usually short side passages.
The influence of fissure/joint control is indicated by relatively high and narrowing ceilings with generally visible fissures; and stalactites, which follow the main fissure (as in Dopulnek Cave (Reg.
No. 764)) or side cracks (as in Arneževa Luknja Cave (Reg.
No. 763)) (Fig.
2).
Nevertheless, in some sections passages are low and wide (as in Jama pri Taboru Cave (Reg.
No. 367)), which reflect matrix porosity and bedding material type influence (Fig.
3).
These passages do not have any visible fractures and stalactites are therefore scattered randomly on the cave roof.
However, when comparing the cross sections of matrix-porosity-influenced passages, they are in general narrower when the conglomerate beds consist of bigger (between 1 and 10 cm) pebbles; and wider when the beds are fine-grained (less than 1 cm big pebbles and sand grains).
The fine-grained conglomerate is less resistant to erosion than the conglomerate of bigger pebbles.
Similar passages have been described by Zampieri et al.
(2005).
However, certain parts of cave passages have been enlarged also due to collapses (as in Arneževa Luknja Cave (Reg.
No. 763)).
Beside linear stream caves, there are numerous caves in Pleistocene conglomerate which resemble shelter caves (Fig.
4, 5 and 6).
They usually form on the edge walls of terraces (e.g. Arhova Zijalka Cave (Reg.
No. 4381)) or side walls of valleys or canyons (e.g. Spodmol 1 pod Dragočajno Cave (Reg.
No. 4580)).
In contrast to their rather simple morphology, their formation is a result of various factors.
Ford and Williams (2007) consider shelter caves as a result of frost shattering; therefore termed also frost pockets.
They usually appear on stronger carbonate rocks where there are wetted fractures via solutionally enlarged openings.
However, solution is the trigger process for large scale frost weathering around the point of groundwater emergence (Ford and Williams 2007; cf.
Zorn 2009).
Shelter caves in Pleistocene conglomerate are the a result of spring sapping by diffusely-fed streams through intergranular pores with no visible passages in the conglomerate as well as the result of frost weathering on different erosion resistant conglomerate layers, which both play a great role on the later evolution of the caves.
Frost weathering is indicated also by broken fragments that are found on the shelter floors and range in sizes from sand to boulder-size rocks.
If a »shelter cave« continues into a horizontal passage, the cave is interpreted as linear stream cave with shelter-type entrance (e.g. Jama pri Lipnici Cave (Reg.
No. 397)).
The size of entrances varies from 1 meter to more than 10 meter in wideness as well as from half a metre to more than 6 metres in height.
Shelter caves usually extend about 10 meters into the conglomerate or less, and their width is sometimes greater than their length (e.g. Spodmol 2 pod Dragočajno Cave (Reg.
No. 4581)) (Fig.
6).
As the registration of certain caves in Pleistocene conglomerate predates the modern Slovenian standard of minimum cave length (10 m), some registered shelter caves are shorter than 10 m (e.g. Janharjeva Jama Cave (Reg.
No. 1341)).
Herewith it should also be noted, that many unregistered shelter caves in Pleistocene conglomerate exist which are shorter than 10 m.
Shelter caves are usually completely dry and hydrologically inactive.
However, in some cases they are still functioning as springs.
But usually the water emerges a few metres below the shelter, and most of the streams are not active in periods of no rain.
Where there are no initial voids to collect surrounding water into a strong flow, a number of small streams develops and hence multiple shelter caves may occur at the same (old or recent) piezometric level close to each other.
The piezometric level is affected by the overall hydrological aspects and/or the boundary level between permeable conglomerate and non-permeable rock beneath it (i.e. Oligocene clay).
Fissures are scarce and usually resemble only young fissures that appear at the edges of terraces or valleys due to unconformability of the conglomerate walls.
Flowstone formations are usually absent.
However, the primary morphology of many shelter caves is often anthropogenically reshaped as in the past a lot of them were used by people as shelters (e.g. completely reworked and walled up Šmajdov Grad Cave (Reg.
No. 1339); Turška Jama Cave (Reg.
No. 4583), which was reworked as a shelter for nearby villagers against Turks in 16th century; Urhov Kevder Cave (Reg.
No. 1340), which was serving as a storage place; Arhova Zijalka Cave (Reg.
No. 4381), which was restored into a shed) (Fig.
5).
Caves in Pleistocene conglomerate, which have been reshaped by collapses and the primary solutional passages are not present any more, are identified as the breakdown cave type (Fig.
7B and C).
The collapses occur over pre-existing solutional passages due to crushed joint zone or instability of the weakly cemented rock in enlarged chambers.
Collapsed passages are in a higher level than primary passages; therefore active water flow in breakdown caves is absent.
However, breakdown caves may not be formed entirely of collapsed passages, since in some cases the primary epiphreatic passages can still be reached (e.g. in Kadunčev Studenec Cave (Reg.
No. 4171)) (Fig.
8).
In this case the »breakdown cave type« is rather omitted.
Limited sections of local collapses in caves of a different type are not an appropriate indicator for the breakdown cave type.
The basic difference between local collapses and a breakdown cave type is that the local collapse is a secondary process in a cave of a different type where the rocks, which were broken down from the ceiling, have not yet been removed (e.g. by flowing water) and represent an anomaly in a cave with prevailing other characteristics.
On the other hand, the collapses and rockfall in the breakdown type of caves are a significant and dominant process of cave formation which completely reshapes the previous cave passages and forms »new« cavities on higher elevations above original stream passage.
Vadose shafts (Fig.
9), as a fourth type of caves in Pleistocene conglomerate, are rare and usually too short to represent a cave, which would be in accordance with Slovenian standard of minimum cave length.
Caves, which fit in this category, have mostly been found in the Udin Boršt terrace.
Furthermore, except the entrance part of Kačja Jama nad Spodnjimi Dupljami Cave (Reg.
No. 6950), which is a vadose shaft, other caves with vertical entrances have been anthropogenically destroyed by filling of entrances with waste and other materials (e.g. Dacarjevo Brezno Cave (Reg.
No. 1075); Jama v Arhovem Partu Cave (Reg.
No. 1077); Projev Grez Cave (Reg.
No. 2746); Jama pri Dobravi Cave (Reg.
No. 1233)).
However, smaller vadose shafts, though not big enough to be registered as caves (less than 10 m deep), have been found within the inner parts of the Udin Boršt conglomerate terrace.
Vadose shafts can be simple shafts with no prospect for continuation on one hand, or the entrance parts of other cave types on the other.
In the latter case, the genesis of vertical shafts and underlying horizontal passages are not necessarily related.
Namely, they were formed in the vadose zone by focused seeping precipitation and this differs from morphogenetic processes which formed other types of caves described above.
A special cave in Pleistocene conglomerate in Slovenia is Vočanarjeva Luknja Cave (Reg.
No. 4648) (Fig.
7A).
It is a passage between collapsed blocks which used to be the edge wall in the valley, but have been separated from it by a collapse.
As its formation is rather random consequence of cliff-edge erosion, it cannot be interpreted as any of the described types of caves in Pleistocene conglomerate nor as a new (special) type of eogenetic caves.
6 Discussion
Four types of eogenetic caves in conglomerate of Pleistocene age are described in this paper.
Although the term »eogenetic« has a broad meaning and from certain aspects of geology may not be precise, we still refer to it as many papers have been published on eogenetic caves recently (Smart et al.
2006; Florea et al.
2007; Ginés and Ginés 2007; De Waele et al.
2009; Lipar and Ferk 2011).
Furthermore, when referring to eogenetic caves, there is a common characteristic of rock, which partly influences overall genesis of caves: primary matrix porosity (»primary porosity« by Choquette and Pray (1970); »matrix porosity« by Ford and Williams (2007); »interparticle and vuggy« porosity by Lucia (2007)).
Later during early diagenesis but still in eogenetic stage, primary porosity may experience modifications such as reduced permeability, but the type of porosity still remains the same.
Nevertheless, new additional porosity (»secondary porosity« by Ford and Williams (2007)) may occur as well (e.g. fissure or conduit porosity).
In the Pleistocene carbonate conglomerate in Slovenia primary matrix porosity is still present.
Pleistocene conglomerates are more or less cemented and also karstified, so the primary porosity is modified in different degrees.
The matrix porosity is mostly expressed within shelter caves by seeping water through conglomerate matrix as well as in certain sections of linear stream caves, where low and wide passages were formed.
Nevertheless, secondary porosity (i.e. fissure and crack porosity) occurs in Pleistocene conglomerates and affected certain cave formations as well.
This could be seen in most of the linear stream caves, with main passages formed and oriented along the main joints.
According to Ford and Williams (2007), dissolutional conduits (e.g. caves) resemble tertiary porosity, which in all determines Pleistocene carbonate conglomerate in Slovenia and consequently caves, formed in it, as a mixture product of primary, secondary, and tertiary porosity.
Caves in conglomerates in eogenetic stage should be distinguished from caves in conglomerates in mezogenetic or telogenetic stage (Filippov 2004; Klimchouk 2004; Goeppert et al.
2011), and from caves in other types of rocks in eogenetic stage (Jennings 1968; Grimes 2006; De Waele et al.
2009).
7 Conclusion
Gravel material was deposited and later cemented to form conglomerates throughout the geological history of the Slovenian territory.
Except the youngest conglomerate of Quaternary age, they went through several phases of diagenesis (e.g. burial or uplift-related diagenesis) and are therefore no longer in the eogenetic stage (i.e. they are in the mezogenetic or telogenetic stage).
The biggest amounts of Pleistocene conglomerates are in the Ljubljana Basin in the central part of Slovenia and along some big river systems (Sava, Soča, Savinja, Drava and Mura).
These conglomerates never went through a phase of deep burial during their diagenesis and are therefore still in the eogenetic stage.
In the carbonate conglomerates, consisting mostly of limestone and dolomite pebbles, caves and surface karst forms have developed.
These are the only parts in Slovenia where eogenetic karst forms have formed and therefore they could be interpreted as valuable geomorphological features or geomorphosites (Erhartič 2010).
In this paper eogenetic caves in Pleistocene carbonate conglomerates are analysed in detail.
Based on extended speleological (morphological and morphometrical) analyses four types of eogenetic caves in Pleistocene conglomerate in Slovenia were described: (1) linear stream caves, (2) shelter caves, (3) breakdown caves, and (4) vadose shafts.
Linear stream caves were formed in the epiphreatic zone.
They are mostly influenced by cracks and fissures (fissure porosity) and the type of the bedding material (matrix porosity).
Shelter caves were also formed right above the epiphreatic zone and functioned or are still functioning as springs.
The speleogenesis was strongly influenced by the matrix porosity and frost weathering.
In some caves or cave passages the prevailing modification processes are collapses due to physical instability and such caves were determined as the breakdown type of caves.
Like in other karst types (e.g. limestones and other rocks in the telogenetic stage), vadose shafts were formed where concentrated water flow seeped underground through the vadose zone.
They were interpreted as the fourth type of eogenetic caves in Pleistocene conglomerates and can appear just as vertical openings, or they can present an access to caves of a different type of genesis (e.g. linear stream caves, breakdown caves).
To conclude with, it is evident that all four types of eogenetic caves can appear individually, although it is common that large cave systems are a combination of passages of different types (e.g. Arneževa Luknja Cave (Reg.
No. 763), Kačja Jama nad Spodnjimi Dupljami Cave (Reg.
No. 6959)).
